Document Name: role of Tri-Sept M in Eye Cream2
Document link: https://www.amazon.com/gp/aw/reviews/B082YJ8C8K



































Amazon.com: Customer reviews: Bliss Bright Idea Vitamin C + Tri-Peptide Eye Cream - Collagen Protecting - Brightens Skin - Diminishes Dark Spots &amp; Visibly Firms Eyes - Clean - Vegan &amp; Cruelty-Free






































Skip to main content
















.us









                   Hello
                

                   Select your address
                



















All


Select the department you want to search in

All Departments
Alexa Skills
Amazon Devices
Amazon Pharmacy
Amazon Warehouse
Appliances
Apps & Games
Arts, Crafts & Sewing
Audible Books & Originals
Automotive Parts & Accessories
Baby
Beauty & Personal Care
Books
CDs & Vinyl
Cell Phones & Accessories
Clothing, Shoes & Jewelry
   Women
   Men
   Girls
   Boys
   Baby
Collectibles & Fine Art
Computers
Credit and Payment Cards
Digital Educational Resources
Digital Music
Electronics
Garden & Outdoor
Gift Cards
Grocery & Gourmet Food
Handmade
Health, Household & Baby Care
Home & Business Services
Home & Kitchen
Industrial & Scientific
Just for Prime
Kindle Store
Luggage & Travel Gear
Luxury Stores
Magazine Subscriptions
Movies & TV
Musical Instruments
Office Products
Online Learning
Pet Supplies
Premium Beauty
Prime Video
Smart Home
Software
Sports & Outdoors
Subscribe & Save
Subscription Boxes
Tools & Home Improvement
Toys & Games
Under $10
Video Games
Whole Foods Market






Search Amazon
























EN





Hello, sign in
Account & Lists



Returns
& Orders



0






        Cart
        












All










Disability Customer Support
Clinic
Customer Service
Best Sellers
Amazon Basics
New Releases
Prime
Today's Deals
Music
Books
Registry
Fashion
Amazon Home
Gift Cards
One Medical
Pharmacy
Toys & Games
Sell
Coupons
Automotive
Find a Gift
Computers
Beauty & Personal Care
Video Games
Home Improvement
Luxury Stores
Health & Household Products
Smart Home
Pet Supplies
Audible







Make every day Earth Day




















Bliss Bright Idea Vitamin C + Tri-Peptide Eye Cream - Collagen...

›


Customer reviews

Customer reviews4.3 out of 5 stars4.3 out of 5985 global ratings





            5 star
          












            
              64%
            
          







            4 star
          












            
              17%
            
          







            3 star
          












            
              11%
            
          







            2 star
          












            
              3%
            
          







            1 star
          












            
              5%
            
          




Bliss Bright Idea Vitamin C + Tri-Peptide Eye Cream - Collagen Protecting - Brightens Skin - Diminishes Dark Spots & Visibly Firms Eyes - Clean - Vegan & Cruelty-Free

    byBliss

Write a review


                How customer reviews and ratings work
            


                    Customer Reviews, including Product Star Ratings help customers to learn more about the product and decide whether it is the right product for them.
                

                    To calculate the overall star rating and percentage breakdown by star, we don’t use a simple average. Instead, our system considers things like how recent a review is and if the reviewer bought the item on Amazon. It also analyzed reviews to verify trustworthiness.
                

                    Learn more how customers reviews work on Amazon
                

See All Buying Options
This page works best with JavaScript. Disabling it will result in some disabled or missing features. You can still see all customer reviews for the product.



Top positive reviewAll positive reviews› Amazon Customer4.0 out of 5 starsMoisturizing under eye creamReviewed in the United States on March 8, 2023I think this is a great product for added moisture under the eyes without a heavy greasy feel. Was hoping since it's vitamin c that it might help brighten the under eye a little bit, but it didn't show results for me. Will continue to use as under eye moisture is important.

Read more
Top critical reviewAll critical reviews› J2.0 out of 5 starsBuyer beware : this burned my under eyes.Reviewed in the United States on February 23, 2023After watching a makeup tutorial, I was excited to give this eye cream a try. Who doesn’t want to love a moisturizing, brightening eye cream?! People in these reviews are complaining about the amount of product for the price point. I’ve paid more for the same amount of other brands product. That’s fairly standard actually for many brands, though I’m sure there’s other alternatives that offer more. A little here goes a long way…Thats not my issue here. I felt that was within reason if it actually does what it says it does. What IS an issue is that it burned my under eyes. Twice. Initially upon applying it the texture was very nice and felt moisturizing, but then suddenly started burning.I decided to move away from it, let the first burn and irritation heal, which took a few days to even look better by the way, and try it again. Same thing happened, though a bit smaller, on the opposite side.I see other reviews now with the same problem.  One person even saying their first container was great and second of the same product burned. Not sure if there’s an ingredient change issue or what’s going on but it’s a big bummer and bigger no for me. I’ve returned it.Maybe it will not do that for others, but the warning should be there. Burned and irritated under eye skin is a no-go.. it’s too sensitive to risk.

Read more



      Sign in to filter reviews
  



















    
        
            985 total ratings, 74 with reviews
        
    
    


There was a problem filtering reviews right now. Please try again later.








From the United States
Amazon Customer4.0 out of 5 stars
Moisturizing under eye cream
Reviewed in the United States on March 8, 2023Verified Purchase
I think this is a great product for added moisture under the eyes without a heavy greasy feel. Was hoping since it's vitamin c that it might help brighten the under eye a little bit, but it didn't show results for me. Will continue to use as under eye moisture is important.




              Helpful


Report

Showing 0 comments
There was a problem loading comments right now. Please try again later.William4.0 out of 5 stars
Great Cream!
Reviewed in the United States on January 19, 2023Verified Purchase
I really enjoyed mostly everything about this cream. The cream is great. Definitely felt a difference and visually made a difference. The ONLY thing I will express my disappointment is the packaging. The jar itself. It does last awhile but you get a teenie tiny bit and for the price you pay for this product? For me - not worth purchasing again. Not leaving a bad review at all... Its a great product but I'm honest and this is just my feeling. I'm on a limited budget and for the price I paid I can find another equally as good product for less and MORE of it.

2 people found this helpful


              Helpful


Report

Showing 0 comments
There was a problem loading comments right now. Please try again later.J2.0 out of 5 stars
Buyer beware : this burned my under eyes.
Reviewed in the United States on February 23, 2023Verified Purchase
After watching a makeup tutorial, I was excited to give this eye cream a try. Who doesn’t want to love a moisturizing, brightening eye cream?! People in these reviews are complaining about the amount of product for the price point. I’ve paid more for the same amount of other brands product. That’s fairly standard actually for many brands, though I’m sure there’s other alternatives that offer more. A little here goes a long way…Thats not my issue here. I felt that was within reason if it actually does what it says it does. What IS an issue is that it burned my under eyes. Twice. Initially upon applying it the texture was very nice and felt moisturizing, but then suddenly started burning.I decided to move away from it, let the first burn and irritation heal, which took a few days to even look better by the way, and try it again. Same thing happened, though a bit smaller, on the opposite side.I see other reviews now with the same problem.  One person even saying their first container was great and second of the same product burned. Not sure if there’s an ingredient change issue or what’s going on but it’s a big bummer and bigger no for me. I’ve returned it.Maybe it will not do that for others, but the warning should be there. Burned and irritated under eye skin is a no-go.. it’s too sensitive to risk.




              Helpful


Report

Showing 0 comments
There was a problem loading comments right now. Please try again later.Zara4.0 out of 5 stars
It’s working for me so far
Reviewed in the United States on May 27, 2021Verified Purchase
I always thought I had sensitive skin, but judging from the other reviews I guess I don’t. I’ve not had any issues of allergic reactions or burning from this product after a month of usage. I do get a tingling or tightening feel under the eyes, but I assumed that was the effect of hydrating my dry skin.So with that in mind, here are some of my thoughts on the cream. It has lovely packaging, the jar is lightweight and gives a good amount of product- a little goes a long way! It’s clear and unscented, a light cream that’s not too heavy and sinks into the skin. I put it on my under eyes and on my eyelid, though bliss says not to do that. I’ve had not issues yet with the cream getting into my eye.I have noticed a reduction of dark circles of time but it’s very slight. Whether the cream is masking them or not I can’t tell, but after daily use my bags are a tinge lighter and a little less puffy- and it’s not due to more sleep on my part.But I had noticed that the cream does leave a bit of a film after it has dried on the skin, it doesn’t absorb completely. I usually have to wash it off in the morning. After the first week of use I did develop little milia under my eyes, but they disappeared after a few days. I have not tried the moisturizer or any other products from this line so I can’t compare them but as far as bliss products go this has been a hit

13 people found this helpful


              Helpful


Report

Showing 0 comments
There was a problem loading comments right now. Please try again later.Christina5.0 out of 5 stars
Great product!
Reviewed in the United States on May 5, 2021Verified Purchase
My dermatologist recommended Citrix vitamin C eye cream to prevent signs of aging, battle fatigue (hello computer) and diminish under eye circles.  Honestly, I like this Bliss product just as much and it is half the price.  It goes on very smoothly - a little goes a long way, so I feel like this product will last a while.  As with most eye creams, I don't notice an immediate difference when I put it on, other than to say it is a pleasant experience (nice scent, no irritation or burning on my sensitive skin) and leaves my skin dewy and feeling nice.  However, after a few days of using it, I noticed that I wasn't scowling over dark circles or dry fine lines.  I've become a huge fan of the Bliss products, having started with their Incredipeel and Vitamin C lotion.  I've been slowly replacing some of my more expensive products with this line because they just work beautifully.

12 people found this helpful


              Helpful


Report

Showing 0 comments
There was a problem loading comments right now. Please try again later.Dana H5.0 out of 5 stars
Super moisturizing
Reviewed in the United States on September 4, 2022Verified Purchase
This is my new favorite under eye cream. It’s super moisturizing and silky going on. it works well under my Clinique foundation. I have very dry sensitive skin and it really is scent free.

2 people found this helpful


              Helpful


Report

Showing 0 comments
There was a problem loading comments right now. Please try again later.Sav cat 5.0 out of 5 stars
Works wonders! 🤩 worth the buy
Reviewed in the United States on December 3, 2020Verified Purchase
I barely started using it a few days ago and I already notice a difference in my skin. I use it for my under eyes but I also like the thick texture of it, so I blend it in with another light moisturizer that I have and I love it! My skin has never felt so moisturized and it definitely looks brighter too. I don’t feel so pale and dull, and because my skin is so moisturized, the pimples disappeared! If you have sensitive or oily skin this may not be the cream for you. But I adore it. Definitely going to invest In the actual moisturized so I don’t use so much of this up

7 people found this helpful


              Helpful


Report

Showing 0 comments
There was a problem loading comments right now. Please try again later.Kasey Miller5.0 out of 5 stars
Amazing product
Reviewed in the United States on October 26, 2020Verified Purchase
I have tried many eye creams, both cheap and expensive, both natural and full of toxins, and have been widely unimpressed so far. I’m so happy to say I finally found an eye cream that I LOVE! It’s deeply moisturizing without being heavy, and actually does firm the crepe-y skin. I’m a young-ish mama with little ones, and I have not slept more than maybe 3 consecutive hours in over 5 years. My under eye area was dark and wrinkly. I saw results from this cream almost immediately. My eyes look like I’m that well rested late twenty something that I was before babies again. I’m comfortable enough to go without makeup again. I’m 100% sold on this eye cream.

10 people found this helpful


              Helpful


Report

Showing 0 comments
There was a problem loading comments right now. Please try again later.bigdom5.0 out of 5 stars
Seems to work well!
Reviewed in the United States on June 14, 2021Verified Purchase
The cream is a nice balance or rich and silky. Starts to moisturize immediately. I buy eye cream with vitamin c because of its antioxidant properties that help with dark puffy bags under my eyes. Skins been looking a little brighter around the eyes, so I say this stuff is a good buy.Disclaimer: I had no obligation to write a review but since the company reached out and asked me to, I thought it couldn't hurt.

3 people found this helpful


              Helpful


Report

Showing 0 comments
There was a problem loading comments right now. Please try again later.Jacqueline1.0 out of 5 stars
This cream is not for me
Reviewed in the United States on March 22, 2023Verified Purchase
I been using this cream for several weeks now and this is the 3rd time that my under eyes puff up like balloons. I don’t think I’m allergic because it doesn’t happen all the time. But it’s really unsettling to wake up to water balloons under my eyes and have to go to work like that so I will not be using this cream again.


















Jacqueline

1.0 out of 5 stars

                This cream is not for me
            


                
                    
                    
                        
                            Reviewed in the United States on March 22, 2023
                        
                    
                
            


            I been using this cream for several weeks now and this is the 3rd time that my under eyes puff up like balloons. I don’t think I’m allergic because it doesn’t happen all the time. But it’s really unsettling to wake up to water balloons under my eyes and have to go to work like that so I will not be using this cream again.
        


                Images in this review
            














              Helpful


Report

Showing 0 comments
There was a problem loading comments right now. Please try again later.←Previous pageNext page→






    Questions? Get fast answers from reviewers
  







      Ask
    
Please make sure that you are posting in the form of a question.
Please enter a question.

    See all 11 answered questions



Need customer service? Click here‹ See all details for Bliss Bright Idea Vitamin C + Tri-Peptide Eye Cream - Collagen...
















                    Your recently viewed items and featured recommendations      ›    View or edit your browsing history     After viewing product detail pages, look here to find an easy way to navigate back to pages you are interested in.         Your recently viewed items and featured recommendations      ›    View or edit your browsing history     After viewing product detail pages, look here to find an easy way to navigate back to pages you are interested in.        




    Back to top
  





Get to Know Us


Careers


Amazon Newsletter


About Amazon


Accessibility


Sustainability


Press Center


Investor Relations


Amazon Devices


Amazon Science





Make Money with Us


Sell products on Amazon


Sell apps on Amazon


Supply to Amazon


Protect & Build Your Brand


Become an Affiliate


Become a Delivery Driver


Start a package delivery business


Advertise Your Products


Self-Publish with Us


Host an Amazon Hub


›See More Ways to Make Money





Amazon Payment Products


Amazon Rewards Visa Signature Cards


Amazon Store Card


Amazon Secured Card


Amazon Business Card


Shop with Points


Credit Card Marketplace


Reload Your Balance


Amazon Currency Converter





Let Us Help You


Amazon and COVID-19


Your Account


Your Orders


Shipping Rates & Policies


Amazon Prime


Returns & Replacements


Manage Your Content and Devices


Your Recalls and Product Safety Alerts


Help

















English



United States






Amazon MusicStream millionsof songs
Amazon AdvertisingFind, attract, andengage customers
6pmScore dealson fashion brands
AbeBooksBooks, art& collectibles
ACX Audiobook PublishingMade Easy
Sell on AmazonStart a Selling Account
 

Amazon BusinessEverything ForYour Business
Amazon FreshGroceries & MoreRight To Your Door
AmazonGlobalShip OrdersInternationally
Home ServicesExperienced ProsHappiness Guarantee
Amazon IgniteSell your originalDigital EducationalResources
Amazon Web ServicesScalable CloudComputing Services
 

AudibleListen to Books & OriginalAudio Performances
Book DepositoryBooks With FreeDelivery Worldwide
Box Office MojoFind MovieBox Office Data
ComiXologyThousands ofDigital Comics
DPReviewDigitalPhotography
FabricSewing, Quilting& Knitting
 

GoodreadsBook reviews& recommendations
IMDbMovies, TV& Celebrities
IMDbProGet Info EntertainmentProfessionals Need
Kindle Direct PublishingIndie Digital & Print PublishingMade Easy

Amazon PhotosUnlimited Photo StorageFree With Prime
Prime Video DirectVideo DistributionMade Easy
 

ShopbopDesignerFashion Brands
Amazon WarehouseGreat Deals onQuality Used Products 
Whole Foods MarketAmerica’s HealthiestGrocery Store
Woot!Deals and Shenanigans
ZapposShoes &Clothing
RingSmart HomeSecurity Systems

 

eero WiFiStream 4K Videoin Every Room
BlinkSmart Securityfor Every Home

Neighbors App  Real-Time Crime& Safety Alerts

Amazon Subscription BoxesTop subscription boxes – right to your door
PillPackPharmacy Simplified
Amazon RenewedLike-new productsyou can trust



Conditions of UsePrivacy NoticeYour Ads Privacy Choices© 1996-2023, Amazon.com, Inc. or its affiliates


























