Document Name: role of Preservative in Care Cream4
Document link: https://www.cosmeticsinfo.org/blog/how-preservatives-keep-cosmetics-safe/









How Preservatives Keep Cosmetics Safe - Cosmetics Info




























































 










Skip to content










THE SCIENCE & SAFETY BEHIND YOUR FAVORITE PRODUCTS                        



Safety Basics 
What’s In My Products 
Get the Facts 
Regulation & Oversight 
About Us 
Multimedia 











Find An Ingredient






















MultimediaBlog
Infographic Gallery
Video Gallery







How Preservatives Keep Cosmetics Safe
SHARE THIS


Consumer Safety
Preservatives
by: Alexandra Kowcz
March 15, 2018

 
If you’ve washed your hands, put on mascara, or applied lotion today, you’ve likely used a product that contains preservatives.
Preservatives are a ubiquitous and necessary part of thousands of cosmetic products, but many people would be hard-pressed to say what they actually do. And although there has been a lot of discussion about the role of preservatives in personal care products, the actual purpose of these ingredients is often missing from the debate.
To summarize: Preservatives are ingredients that protect products against the growth of bacteria, fungi, and yeast. Since bacteria, fungi, and yeast naturally occur on our skin, in the air, and in our water, you expose your cosmetics to these elements every time you use them. To keep these products from becoming harmful, many contain preservatives.
Did you know? Parabens are identical to an acid that occurs naturally in many fruits and vegetables.
What would happen if our personal care products didn’t contain preservatives? For one, products could become moldy, discolored, or develop an unpleasant smell. Microbial growth in products used around the eyes and skin can cause serious health problems like infection or irritation.
Our products would look and function very differently without preservatives. Check out this video to compare products with and without preservatives.

The next time you look at the ingredient list for your favorite product, there’s no need to be confused by ingredients like phenoxyethanol, parabens, formaldehyde-releasers or methylisothiazolinone and methylchloroisothiazolinone.
We’re always here to help you learn about the science and safety behind your favorite products.
About the Author:
Alexandra Kowcz is the chief scientist at the Personal Care Products Council. In this role, she oversees PCPC's scientific programs, technical committees and publications, and serves as the industry's scientific liaison for several domestic and international organizations.



Recent Blog Posts Will you please grab the mayo from the fridge? It’s next to the shampoo. Stephen FosterOctober 14, 2021READ MORE Explaining Cosmetics Allergens Alexandra KowczMarch 1, 2021READ MORE Product Sampling in a COVID-19 World Alexandra KowczSeptember 8, 2020READ MORE Protecting Products from Becoming a Microbial Meal Dolores ShawJuly 1, 2020READ MORE Protect Your Health: Use Sunscreen Every Day Zoe Diana Draelos, MDMay 21, 2020READ MORE Making Sense of Science Linda LoretzDecember 16, 2019READ MORE The Safety of the Fragrances You Love Linda LoretzOctober 30, 2019READ MORE Where Beauty Meets Science: The Role of R&D Microbiology in Product Formulation Leigh A. Farris, PhD, Mary Kay, Inc.October 23, 2019READ MORE 7 Sunscreen Myths Debunked by Beauty Scientists Alexandra KowczMay 23, 2019READ MORE Halloween Face Products: How to Choose Them and How to Use Them Jay Ansell, Ph.D., DABTOctober 25, 2018READ MORE Counterfeit Cosmetics: Too Good to be True? Thomas MyersOctober 1, 2018READ MORE 6 Tips to Keep Your Beauty Products Safe Alexandra KowczApril 25, 2018READ MORE Reading the Label of Your Favorite Beauty Product Alexandra KowczApril 18, 2018READ MORE How Preservatives Keep Cosmetics Safe Alexandra KowczMarch 15, 2018READ MORE The Science & Safety Behind Your Favorite Cosmetics Products Alexandra KowczFebruary 24, 2018READ MORE 











Product Types 
Baby
Bath
Eye Makeup
Facial Makeup
Fragrance
Hair Care
Hair Color
Nail
Oral Care
Personal Cleanliness
Shaving
Skin Care
Sun Protection



Resources 
History of Cosmetics
FAQs
Sustainability Report
Resources
Multimedia



About Us 
IMPORTANT LEGAL NOTICE
About Us
Privacy









                © 2023 All Rights Reserved.  Cosmeticsinfo.org
            
















