Document Name: role of Sodium Citrate (solution)* in Barrier Cream1
Document link: https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailymed/fda/fdaDrugXsl.cfm?setid=44463d7c-6397-4c57-9d60-f753d91d0465&type=display









      HYDROCORTISONE CREAM USP, 2.5% 
      
         
      
   






HYDROCORTISONE- hydrocortisone cream 
RPK Pharmaceuticals, Inc.

----------


HYDROCORTISONE CREAM USP, 2.5% 











FOR EXTERNAL USE ONLY • NOT FOR OPHTHALMIC USE



Rx only








DESCRIPTION


The topical corticosteroids constitute a class of primarily synthetic steroids used as anti-inflammatory and anti-pruritic agents. Hydrocortisone cream is a member of this class. Hydrocortisone cream contains the synthetic steroid hydrocortisone (Pregn-4-ene-3,20-dione, 11, 17, 21-trihydroxy-, (11ß)-) which has a molecular formula of C21H30O5, a molecular weight of 362.46 and CAS Registry Number 50-23-7.


Each gram of the 2.5% cream contains 25 mg of hydrocortisone, USP in a cream base of cetyl alcohol, citric acid, glyceryl stearate, isopropyl myristate, methylparaben, polyoxyl 40 stearate, polysorbate 60, propylene glycol, propylparaben, purified water, sodium citrate, sorbic acid, sorbitan monostearate, stearyl alcohol, white wax and citric acid solution and sodium citrate solution to adjust pH.





CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY


Topical corticosteroids share anti-inflammatory, antipruritic and vasoconstrictive actions.
The mechanism of anti-inflammatory activity of the topical corticosteroids is unclear. Various laboratory methods, including vasoconstrictor assays, are used to compare and to predict potencies and/or clinical efficacies of the topical corticosteroids. There is some evidence to suggest that a recognizable correlation exists between vasoconstrictor potency and therapeutic efficacy in man.

Pharmacokinetics: The extent of percutaneous absorption of topical corticosteroids is determined by many factors including the vehicle, the integrity of the epidermal barrier, and the use of occlusive dressings.
Topical corticosteroids can be absorbed from normal intact skin. Inflammation and/or other disease processes in the skin increase percutaneous absorption. Occlusive dressings substantially increase the percutaneous absorption of topical corticosteroids. Thus, occlusive dressings may be a valuable therapeutic adjunct for treatment of resistant dermatoses (see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION). Once absorbed through the skin, topical corticosteroids are handled through pharmacokinetic pathways similar to systemically administered corticosteroids. Corticosteroids are bound to plasma proteins in varying degrees. Corticosteroids are metabolized primarily in the liver and are then excreted by the kidneys. Some of the topical corticosteroids and their metabolites are also excreted into the bile.





INDICATIONS AND USAGE


Topical corticosteroids are indicated for the relief of the inflammatory and pruritic manifestations of corticosteroid-responsive dermatoses.





CONTRAINDICATIONS


Topical corticosteroids are contraindicated in those patients with a history of hypersensitivity to any of the components of the preparation.





PRECAUTIONS






General


Systemic absorption of topical corticosteroids has produced reversible hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis suppression, manifestations of Cushing’s syndrome, hyperglycemia and glucosuria in some patients.
Conditions which augment systemic absorption include the application of the more potent steroids, use over large surface areas, prolonged use, and the addition of occlusive dressings.
Therefore, patients receiving a large dose of a potent topical steroid applied to a large surface area or under an occlusive dressing should be evaluated periodically for evidence of HPA axis suppression by using the urinary free cortisol and ACTH stimulation tests. If HPA axis suppression is noted, an attempt should be made to withdraw the drug, to reduce the frequency of application, or to substitute a less potent steroid.
Recovery of HPA axis function is generally prompt and complete upon discontinuation of the drug. Infrequently, signs and symptoms of steroid withdrawal may occur, requiring supplemental systemic corticosteroids.
Children may absorb proportionally larger amounts of topical corticosteroids and thus be more susceptible to systemic toxicity (see PRECAUTIONS–Pediatric Use).
If irritation develops, topical corticosteroids should be discontinued and appropriate therapy instituted. In the presence of dermatological infections, the use of an appropriate antifungal or antibacterial agent should be instituted. If a favorable response does not occur promptly, the corticosteroid should be discontinued until the infection has been adequately controlled.





Information for the Patient

Patients using topical corticosteroids should receive the following information and instructions.

This medication is to be used as directed by the physician. It is for external use only. Avoid contact with the eyes.
Patients should be advised not to use this medication for any disorder other than for which it was prescribed.
The treated skin area should not be bandaged or otherwise covered or wrapped as to be occlusive unless directed by the physician.
Patients should report any signs of local adverse reactions especially under occlusive dressing.
Parents of pediatric patients should be advised not to use tight-fitting diapers or plastic pants on a child being treated in the diaper area, as these garments may constitute occlusive dressings.






Laboratory Tests


The following tests may be helpful in evaluating the HPA axis suppression: Urinary free cortisol test; ACTH stimulation test.





Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility


Long-term animal studies have not been performed to evaluate the carcinogenic potential or the effect on fertility of topical corticosteroids.
Studies to determine mutagenicity with prednisolone and hydrocortisone have revealed negative results.





Pregnancy






Teratogenic Effects:


Corticosteroids are generally teratogenic in laboratory animals when administered systemically at relatively low dosage levels. The more potent corticosteroids have been shown to be teratogenic after dermal application in laboratory animals. There are no adequate and well-controlled studies in pregnant women on teratogenic effects from topically applied corticosteroids. Therefore, topical corticosteroids should be used during pregnancy only if the potential benefit justifies the potential risk to the fetus. Drugs of this class should not be used extensively on pregnant patients, in large amounts, or for prolonged periods of time.






Nursing Mothers


It is not known whether topical administration of corticosteroids could result in sufficient systemic absorption to produce detectable quantities in breast milk. Systemically administered corticosteroids are secreted into breast milk in quantities not likely to have a deleterious effect on the infant. Nevertheless, caution should be exercised when topical corticosteroids are administered to a nursing woman.





Pediatric Use



Pediatric patients may demonstrate greater susceptibility to topical corticosteroid-induced HPA axis suppression and Cushing’s syndrome than mature patients because of a larger skin surface area to body weight ratio.

Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis suppression, Cushing’s syndrome and intracranial hypertension have been reported in children receiving topical corticosteroids. Manifestations of adrenal suppression in pediatric patients include linear growth retardation, delayed weight gain, low plasma cortisol levels, and absence of response to ACTH stimulation. Manifestations of intracranial hypertension include bulging fontanelles, headaches and bilateral papilledema.
Administration of topical corticosteroids to pediatric patients should be limited to the least amount compatible with an effective therapeutic regimen. Chronic corticosteroid therapy may interfere with the growth and development of children.






ADVERSE REACTIONS


The following local adverse reactions are reported infrequently with topical corticosteroids, but may occur more frequently with the use of occlusive dressings. These reactions are listed in approximate decreasing order of occurrence: burning, itching, irritation, dryness, folliculitis, hypertrichosis, acneiform eruptions, hypopigmentation, perioral dermatitis, allergic contact dermatitis, maceration of the skin, secondary infection, skin atrophy, striae and miliaria.
To report SUSPECTED ADVERSE EVENTS, contact Actavis at 1-888-838-2872 or FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or http://www.fda.gov/medwatch for voluntary reporting of adverse reactions. 





OVERDOSAGE


Topically applied corticosteroids can be absorbed in sufficient amounts to produce systemic effects (see PRECAUTIONS).





DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION


Topical corticosteroids are generally applied to the affected area as a thin film from 2 to 4 times daily depending on the severity of the condition.
Occlusive dressings may be used for the management of psoriasis or recalcitrant conditions.
If an infection develops, the use of occlusive dressings should be discontinued and appropriate antimicrobial therapy instituted.





HOW SUPPLIED


Product:    53002-9660
NDC:    53002-9660-1   20 g in a TUBE 




Hydrocortisone 2.5% Cream








HYDROCORTISONE 		
					

hydrocortisone cream





Product Information


Product TypeHUMAN PRESCRIPTION DRUGItem Code (Source)NDC:53002-9660(NDC:0472-0337)


Route of AdministrationTOPICAL








Active Ingredient/Active Moiety


Ingredient NameBasis of StrengthStrength


HYDROCORTISONE (UNII: WI4X0X7BPJ)  (HYDROCORTISONE - UNII:WI4X0X7BPJ) HYDROCORTISONE25 mg  in 1 g








Inactive Ingredients


Ingredient NameStrength


CETYL ALCOHOL (UNII: 936JST6JCN)  


CITRIC ACID MONOHYDRATE (UNII: 2968PHW8QP)  


GLYCERYL MONOSTEARATE (UNII: 230OU9XXE4)  


ISOPROPYL MYRISTATE (UNII: 0RE8K4LNJS)  


METHYLPARABEN (UNII: A2I8C7HI9T)  


POLYOXYL 40 STEARATE (UNII: 13A4J4NH9I)  


POLYSORBATE 60 (UNII: CAL22UVI4M)  


PROPYLENE GLYCOL (UNII: 6DC9Q167V3)  


PROPYLPARABEN (UNII: Z8IX2SC1OH)  


WATER (UNII: 059QF0KO0R)  


SODIUM CITRATE, UNSPECIFIED FORM (UNII: 1Q73Q2JULR)  


SORBIC ACID (UNII: X045WJ989B)  


SORBITAN MONOSTEARATE (UNII: NVZ4I0H58X)  


STEARYL ALCOHOL (UNII: 2KR89I4H1Y)  


WHITE WAX (UNII: 7G1J5DA97F)  











Packaging


#Item CodePackage DescriptionMarketing Start DateMarketing End Date


1NDC:53002-9660-120 g in 1 TUBE; Type 0: Not a Combination Product10/01/2017











Marketing Information


Marketing CategoryApplication Number or Monograph CitationMarketing Start DateMarketing End Date


ANDAANDA08968209/30/2002








Labeler - RPK Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
							(147096275)
						




Establishment


NameAddressID/FEIBusiness Operations


RPK Pharmaceuticals, Inc.147096275RELABEL(53002-9660) , REPACK(53002-9660) 




Revised: 12/2020

Document Id: b153c0d8-1372-4283-a057-58253787469c
34391-3
Set id: 44463d7c-6397-4c57-9d60-f753d91d0465
Version: 3
Effective Time: 20201216

 RPK Pharmaceuticals, Inc.



