Document Name: role of Silica in Barrier Cream1
Document link: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/barrier-cream































Barrier cream  | DermNet














































DermNet provides Google Translate, a free machine translation service. Note that this may not provide an exact translation in all languages









logo-white-2022












Topics A-Z


Images


Cases


Jobs


More 
selector copy










Skin checker


About


Browse


Glossary


Quizzes


Donate


Contact










searchable









Translate 















TOPICS A-Z 


IMAGES 


CASES 


JOBS 


SKIN CHECKER 


ABOUT 


BROWSE 


GLOSSARY 


QUIZZES 


DONATE 


CONTACT 
















Home


    arrow-right-small-blue
  



Topics A–Z


    arrow-right-small-blue
  



Barrier cream





info-icon









print-icon













            Barrier cream — codes and concepts
        




Synonyms:

Barrier preparation



Categories:

Treatment or procedure



Subcategories:

Occlusive ingredients,
Humectants



ICD-10:

Y56.3



SNOMED CT:

346336001, 25981009






Barrier cream

Matthew Nicol, final year medical student, Queen’s University of Belfast, United Kingdom. DermNet New Zealand Editor in Chief: Hon A/Prof Amanda Oakley, Dermatologist, Hamilton, New Zealand. July 2017. Copy editor: Gus Mitchell. September 2017.





toc-icon










                Table of contents
                


    arrow-right-small
  





Introduction - skin barrier
Introduction - barrier cream
Ingredients
Risks and contraindications


















What is the skin barrier?The skin barrier serves to protect the body and prevent water loss. It is formed by the outermost layer of the skin, called the stratum corneum, containing the protein keratin and corneocytes (dead skin cells) held together by a lipid intercellular matrix. Damage to the skin barrier; for example, due to dermatitis, leads to transepidermal water loss, increased sensitivity to contact irritants and allergens, and inflammation.What is a barrier cream?A barrier cream is a product applied directly to the skin surface to help maintain the skin’s physical barrier, providing protection from irritants and preventing the skin from drying out. Barrier products can also be formulated as pastes, ointments and sprays. They can also make it easier to remove paint, glue, or sealant from hands during or after industrial or occupational work, without necessitating the use of harsh solvents. They persist on the skin for several hours, even after gentle washing. They are applied sparingly and reapplied as necessary.Barrier creams are particularly useful in the management of:Hand dermatitis, due to contact with harsh chemicals, frequent contact with water, or repetitive friction
Napkin dermatitis (also known as diaper rash), due to contact with urine and faeces, in babies and in adults with incontinence (incontinence-associated dermatitis)
Stoma dermatitis, due to body fluids and stoma appliances
Sites prone to pressure sores
Very dry skin.  

Irritant contact dermatitis




Palmar dermatitis




Hand dermatitis




Stoma dermatitis


What are the ingredients in barrier creams?Conventional barrier creamIngredients in conventional skin barrier creams can be classified as either occlusives or humectants. Some products have a combination of occlusive and humectant ingredients.Occlusive ingredients are insoluble in water. They include petroleum jelly, silicone/dimethicone and zinc oxide.
Humectants increase the skin’s ability to hold onto water. They include glycerine, sorbitol, urea, seaweed extract, hyaluronic acid and alpha hydroxy acids.
Petroleum-based products are more effective at reducing transepidermal water loss and keeping the skin hydrated. Silicone/dimethicone barrier creams are less greasy and may be preferred aesthetically. Small amounts do not decrease dressing adhesion, hence their usefulness for stoma dermatitis. Novel barrier creamNovel barrier creams contain additional ingredients to promote healing of the skin barrier, such as ceramides and vitamin B3.Natural ceramides are an important component of the intercellular matrix of the stratum corneum. Creams containing synthetic ceramides are thought to be particularly useful in the management of atopic dermatitis.
Vitamin B3 (also known as vitamin PP or nicotinamide) reduces trans-epidermal water loss and keeps the skin hydrated. It promotes repair of the skin barrier by stimulating the production of lipids in the skin.













What are the risks and contraindications to barrier creams?Barrier creams are usually very well tolerated. Although uncommon, some people may suffer from allergic contact dermatitis to components such as preservatives, fragrances, and other ingredients in barrier creams.Some occlusive barrier creams may also aggravate acne when applied to the face. Most barrier creams should not be applied directly to broken skin.



























 

ReferencesDraelos ZD. New treatments for restoring impaired epidermal barrier permeability: Skin barrier repair creams. Clin Dermatol. 2012; 30(3): 345–348. DOI:10.1016/j.clindermatol.2011.08.018. PubMed
Crowther JM, Sieg A, Blenkiron P et al. Measuring the effects of topical moisturizers on changes in stratum corneum thickness, water gradients and hydration in vivo. Br J Dermatol. 2008; 159(3): 567–577. DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2008.08703.x. Journal
On DermNetEmollients and moisturisers
Contact dermatitis
Topical treatment for acne
Barrier function in atopic dermatitis
Incontinence-associated dermatitis

Books about skin diseasesBooks about the skin
Dermatology Made Easy book




 
Related information

































Sign up to the newsletter






Full name




Email address




Tell us your profession or specialty

Profession or specialty
	
Dermatologist
	
GP
	
HCP
	
Marketing/media
	
Medical student or physician in training
	
Patient
	
Caregiver
	





SPAM PROTECTION - DO NOT FILL THIS FIELD IN

















IMPORTANT NOTE:


DermNet does not provide an online consultation service.If you have any concerns with your skin or its treatment, see a dermatologist for advice.







Sponsors
Donate
Website terms
FAQ
Advertising policy
Privacy policy
Image licence
Newsletter
Volunteer
Submit a photo







logo-white-2022









  © 2023 DermNet New Zealand Trust. 



footer-facebook






footer-twitter






footer-youtube






footer-instagram











        Creative Commons License
    





























logo-dark-2022







© 2023 DermNet New Zealand Trust. 
DermNet does not provide an online consultation service. If you have any concerns with your skin or its treatment, see a dermatologist for advice.








