Document Name: role of EMULGADE 1000 NI in Eye Cream1
Document link: https://www.ulprospector.com/en/na/PersonalCare/Detail/75/978442/Depuff--Brighten-Eye-Cream-Formulation-SC-US-17-34984-19




Depuff + Brighten Eye Cream (Formulation #SC-US-17-34984-19) by BASF Care Creations - Personal Care & Cosmetics












































Login


Register


English 



                              English
                            



                              Français
                            



                              Deutsch
                            



                              Español
                            



                              Português
                            



                              简体中文
                            



                              繁體中文
                            



                              日本語
                            




North America 



                              Asia Pacific
                            



                              Europe (EMEA)
                            



                              Latin America
                            



                              North America
                            














Search



Region

User













Search







Samples (0)












Home


Personal Care & Cosmetics


Depuff + Brighten Eye Cream (Formulation #SC-US-17-34984-19)
        



    Depuff + Brighten Eye Cream (Formulation #SC-US-17-34984-19)
    


Company:
BASF Care Creations




Documents



Depuff + Brighten Eye Cream (Formulation #SC-US-17-34984-19)




In this Formulation


 (Request a sample)Send your request now - Cetiol® CC
 (Request a sample)Send your request now - Cetiol® Sensoft
 (Request a sample)Send your request now - Cibafast® H Liquid
 (Request a sample)Send your request now - Cosmedia® SP
 (Request a sample)Send your request now - Emulgade® 1000 NI
 (Request a sample)Send your request now - Hyalufix™ GL
 (Request a sample)Send your request now - Lanette® 16
 (Request a sample)Send your request now - Myritol® 331

View All





BASF Care Creations makes their documentation available in the regions indicated below:










This ultra-luxe eye cream, powered by Shadownyl™, an organic algae extract and Hyalufix™ GL, a galanga leaf extract, leaves the delicate skin under your eyes feeling nourished and calm. It works to reduce the appearance of dark circles and fine lines, allowing you to appear vibrant and awake, not dull and tired.


Company
BASF Care Creations develops and produces a comprehensive portfolio of raw materials for the Personal Care industry such as effect pigments, emollients, complexing agents, neutralizers, setting polymers, conditioning polymers, rheology modifiers, UV filters, mild surfactants, solubilizers, emulsifiers, and solvents.  These ingredients are ideal in color cosmetics and hair, oral, skin and sun care products.
Company Documents

BASF and StitchCrew open application for cohort two of the Inclusive Beauty Accelerator
Innovative Chemistry for a Sustainable Future




        The information presented here was acquired by UL from the producer of the product or material or original information provider.  However, UL assumes no responsibility or liability for the accuracy of the information contained on this website and strongly encourages that upon final product or material selection information is validated with the manufacturer.  This website provides links to other websites owned by third parties. The content of such third party sites is not within our control, and we cannot and will not take responsibility for the information or content.
    



Create Your Free Account

                    Request pricing or technical help
                

Share:











Categories
Attributes Categories

Applied Area ~ Eyes
Form / Type ~ Creams

Formulations Categories

Skin / Body Care ~ Toners












×Close

ABOUT
Prospector Lists



                        Lists combine the ease of Bookmarks with the versatility of Tags. Instead of one collection of bookmarked items, create as many collections, called "Lists," as you need.
                    
Previous Bookmarks and Tags




                                Find the link to your List page in the user menu.
                            

                            All Tags have been converted to separate Lists, and your bookmarked items have been saved to a "Bookmarks" List.




Adding Items

                        When you click the Add to List button, a dropdown of your existing Lists appears. Click the List name to which you want to add this product or formula.
                    



Create a New List

                        You can also create a new List. Simply click "Create a New List" and enter a name.
                    



Multiple Lists

                        When you define a new List, the current item is automatically added to it. You can add a product or formula to as many Lists as you need.



Explore Your Lists

                        Easily see which Lists this item appears in, and quickly go to that List from the links that appear on the page.



 Back







Next 
Done 


















 About
          

About
Prospector
Contact Us
Advertising Programs
Datasheet Services
Knowledge Center

Data Subject Access Request Portal





 Formulating Materials & Ingredients
          

Formulating Materials & Ingredients
Adhesives & Sealants
Food, Beverage & Nutrition
Graphic Arts & Inks
Household, Industrial & Institutional Cleaners
Lubricant & Metalworking Fluids
Paint & Coatings
Personal Care & Cosmetics




 Solid Materials
          

Solid Materials

Metals
Plastics
Plastics Additives





            UL is a global independent safety science company offering expertise in certification, validation, testing, inspections, auditing, education and advisory services. Our breadth, established objectivity and proven history mean we are a symbol of trust and enable us to help provide peace of mind to all.
          

Learn More





          UL and the UL logo are trademarks of UL LLC ©2023 All Rights Reserved.

          
Terms & Conditions
Privacy Policy
Data Policy









×


We're sorry, but the industry you have selected is not currently available in your chosen language. You may choose a language below to continue to this industry or close this dialog above.

English
Simplified Chinese









GDPR Notice:
Close














  









