Document Name: role of Generol 122E-10 in Eye Cream2
Document link: https://www.webmd.com/drugs/2/drug-91381/nitrofurantoin-monohydrate-macrocrystals-oral/details




Nitrofurantoin Monohydrate/Macrocrystals Oral: Uses, Side Effects, Interactions, Pictures, Warnings & Dosing - WebMD




 


























 Skip to main content  Check Your Symptoms  Find A Doctor  Find A Dentist Health  A-Z Health A-Z  Common Conditions   ADD/ADHD  Allergies  Arthritis  Cancer  Coronavirus (COVID-19)  Depression  Diabetes  Eye Health  Heart Disease  Lung Disease  Orthopedics  Pain Management  Sexual Conditions  Skin Problems  Sleep Disorders  View All  Resources   Symptom Checker  WebMD Blogs  Podcasts  Newsletters  WebMD Magazine  Best Hospitals  Find a Doctor  Surgeries and Procedures A-Z  Featured Topics  Slideshow  Signs You Have Already Had COVID  Slideshow  Get Help for Migraine Relief Drugs &  Supplements Drugs & Supplements  Find & Review   Drugs  Supplements  Drug Basics & Safety   Commonly Abused Drugs  Taking Meds When Pregnant  Tools   Manage Your Medications  Pill Identifier  Check for Interactions  Drug Comparison Tool  Featured Topics  Slideshow  Vitamins You Need as You Age  Coronavirus  COVID-19 Vaccines Living  Healthy Living Healthy  Diet, Food & Fitness   Diet & Weight Management  Weight Loss & Obesity  Food & Recipes  Fitness & Exercise  Beauty & Balance   Healthy Beauty  Health & Balance  Sex & Relationships  Oral Care  Living Well   Women's Health  Men's Health  Aging Well  Healthy Sleep  Healthy Teens  Featured Topics  Article  Smart Grocery Shopping When You Have Diabetes  Quiz  Do You Know the Benefits of Walking? Family &  Pregnancy Family & Pregnancy  All About Pregnancy   Getting Pregnant  First Trimester  Second Trimester  Third Trimester  View All  Parenting Guide   Newborn & Baby  Children's Health  Children's Vaccines  View All  Pet Care Essentials   Healthy Cats  Healthy Dogs  View All  Featured Topics  Slideshow  Smart Snacks When You're Pregnant  Slideshow  Surprising Things You Didn't Know About Dogs and Cats News &  Experts News & Experts  Health News   Simple Test Could Assess Risk of Dementia  You May Not Need 10,000 Steps a Day  Long COVID Treatment Isn't ‘One-Size-Fits-All’  ‘Stuck’ Stem Cells May Be to Blame for Gray Hair  Sleep Apnea May Cause Cognitive Problems  Experts & Community   Support Groups  Blogs  Webinars  News Center  New Book: Take Control of Your Heart Disease Risk  Featured Topics  WebMD Editorial Special  MINOCA: The Heart Attack You Didn’t See Coming  Get Our Newsletters  Health News and Information, Delivered to Your Inbox  Sign In  Mobile Apps  Subscriptions  Privacy and More  Sign In  Subscribe  MENU DRUGS AND MEDICATIONS CENTERFind a DrugMy MedicinePill IdentifierInteraction CheckerFind a VitaminFind a PharmacyVITAMINS & SUPPLEMENTS CENTERFind a Vitamin or SupplementVitamin Lifestyle GuideAssess Your Vitamin NeedsFIRST AID RESOURCESFirst Aid HomeFirst Aid Kit & Wound CareFirst Aid Mobile Drugs & Medications  Nitrofurantoin MONO-MACRO  Nitrofurantoin MONO-MACRO - Uses, Side Effects, and More Common Brand(S): Macrobid  Generic Name(S): nitrofurantoin monohyd/m-cryst  View Free Coupon  Uses  Side Effects  Precautions  Interactions  Overdose  Images  Reviews (101)  Uses This medication is an antibiotic used to treat bladder infections (acute cystitis). It works by stopping the growth of bacteria.This antibiotic treats only bacterial infections. It will not work for viral infections (such as common cold, flu). Using any antibiotic when it is not needed can cause it to not work for future infections.This medication should not be used in infants younger than 1 month old (see also Precautions section). This drug should not be used to treat infections outside the bladder (including kidney infections such as pyelonephritis or perinephric abscesses). How to use Nitrofurantoin MONO-MACRO Take this medication by mouth with food as directed by your doctor, usually twice daily (every 12 hours). Swallow the medication whole for best results.Do not use magnesium trisilicate-containing antacids while taking this medication. These antacids can bind with nitrofurantoin, preventing its full absorption into your system.For the best effect, take this antibiotic at evenly spaced times. To help you remember, take this medication at the same time(s) every day.Continue to take this medication until the full prescribed amount is finished, even if symptoms disappear after a few days. Stopping the medication too early may allow bacteria to continue to grow, which may result in a return of the infection.Tell your doctor if your condition lasts or gets worse. Side Effects Nausea, headache may occur. If any of these effects last or get worse, tell your doctor or pharmacist promptly.Remember that this medication has been prescribed because your doctor has judged that the benefit to you is greater than the risk of side effects. Many people using this medication do not have serious side effects.This medication may cause your urine to turn dark yellow or brown in color. This is usually a harmless, temporary effect and will disappear when the medication is stopped. However, dark brown urine can also be a sign of rare side effects (liver problems or anemia). Get medical help right away if you notice dark urine along with any of the following symptoms: nausea/vomiting that doesn't stop, stomach/abdominal pain, yellowing eyes/skin, tiredness, fast/pounding heartbeat.Tell your doctor right away if you have any serious side effects, including: headaches that are severe or don't go away, eye pain, vision changes, mental/mood changes, new signs of infection (such as sore throat that doesn't go away, fever), easy bruising/bleeding.Get medical help right away if you have any very serious side effects, including: numbness/tingling of the hands/feet, unusual muscle weakness.This medication may rarely cause very serious (possibly fatal) lung problems. Lung problems may occur within the first month of treatment or after long-term use of nitrofurantoin (generally for 6 months or longer). Get medical help right away if you develop symptoms of lung problems, including: cough that doesn't go away, chest pain, shortness of breath/trouble breathing, joint/muscle pain, bluish/purplish skin.This medication may rarely cause a severe intestinal condition due to a bacteria called C. difficile. This condition may occur during treatment or weeks to months after treatment has stopped. Tell your doctor right away if you develop: diarrhea that doesn't stop, abdominal or stomach pain/cramping, blood/mucus in your stool.If you have these symptoms, do not use anti-diarrhea or opioid products because they may make symptoms worse.Use of nitrofurantoin for prolonged or repeated periods may result in oral thrush or a new vaginal yeast infection. Contact your doctor if you notice white patches in your mouth, a change in vaginal discharge, or other new symptoms.A very serious allergic reaction to this drug is rare. However, get medical help right away if you notice any symptoms of a serious allergic reaction, including: rash, itching/swelling (especially of the face/tongue/throat), severe dizziness, trouble breathing.This is not a complete list of possible side effects. If you notice other effects not listed above, contact your doctor or pharmacist. In the US - Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report side effects to FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or at www.fda.gov/medwatch.In Canada - Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report side effects to Health Canada at 1-866-234-2345. Precautions Before taking nitrofurantoin, tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to it; or if you have any other allergies. This product may contain inactive ingredients, which can cause allergic reactions or other problems. Talk to your pharmacist for more details.Before using this medication, tell your doctor or pharmacist your medical history, especially of: kidney disease, liver disease (including liver problems caused by nitrofurantoin in the past), a certain genetic condition (G-6-PD deficiency), lung disease, numbness/tingling of the arms/legs, vitamin B deficiency, mineral imbalance, blood disorders (such as anemia), diabetes, ongoing weakness due to long-term disease, certain eye disorders (such as optic neuritis).Older adults may be at a greater risk for side effects while using this drug, especially nerve, liver or lung problems.This medication may cause live bacterial vaccines (such as typhoid vaccine) to not work well. Tell your health care professional that you are using this medication before having any immunizations/vaccinations.During pregnancy, this medication should be used only when clearly needed. It must not be used if you are near the end of your pregnancy (38-42 weeks), or at the time of labor and delivery. Doing so may cause a certain blood disorder (hemolytic anemia) in your baby. Discuss the risks and benefits with your doctor.This medication passes into breast milk and may have undesirable effects on nursing infants younger than 1 month old or those with a certain genetic condition (G-6-PD deficiency). Consult your doctor before breast-feeding. Interactions See also How to Use section.Drug interactions may change how your medications work or increase your risk for serious side effects. This document does not contain all possible drug interactions. Keep a list of all the products you use (including prescription/nonprescription drugs and herbal products) and share it with your doctor and pharmacist. Do not start, stop, or change the dosage of any medicines without your doctor's approval.Some products that may interact with this drug are: certain drugs to treat gout (uricosuric drugs such as sulfinpyrazone).This medication may interfere with certain laboratory tests (certain urine glucose tests), possibly causing false test results. Make sure laboratory personnel and all your doctors know you use this drug. Does Nitrofurantoin MONO-MACRO interact with other drugs you are taking?  Enter your medication into the WebMD interaction checker  Check Interaction  Overdose If someone has overdosed and has serious symptoms such as passing out or trouble breathing, call 911. Otherwise, call a poison control center right away. US residents can call their local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. Canada residents can call a provincial poison control center. Notes Do not share this medication with others.This medication has been prescribed for your current condition only. Do not use it later for another infection unless your doctor tells you to.Lab and/or medical tests (such as kidney/liver function, blood counts/CBC, bacterial culture) should be done while you are taking this medication. Lung function tests should be performed if you are prescribed nitrofurantoin products for extended treatment (several months or more). Keep all medical and lab appointments. Consult your doctor for more details. Missed Dose If you miss a dose, take it as soon as you remember. If it is near the time of the next dose, skip the missed dose. Take your next dose at the regular time. Do not double the dose to catch up. Storage Store at room temperature away from light and moisture. Do not store in the bathroom. Keep all medications away from children and pets.Do not flush medications down the toilet or pour them into a drain unless instructed to do so. Properly discard this product when it is expired or no longer needed. Consult your pharmacist or local waste disposal company. Images nitrofurantoin monohydrate/macrocrystals 100 mg capsuleColor: ivory,blackShape: oblongImprint: logo and 122 logo and 122This medicine is a ivory black, oblong, capsule imprinted with "logo and 122" and "logo and 122".nitrofurantoin monohydrate/macrocrystals 100 mg capsuleColor: yellow,grayShape: oblongImprint: AN 478This medicine is a ivory black, oblong, capsule imprinted with "logo and 122" and "logo and 122".nitrofurantoin monohydrate/macrocrystals 100 mg capsuleColor: yellow,blackShape: oblongImprint: Macrobid 52427-285This medicine is a ivory black, oblong, capsule imprinted with "logo and 122" and "logo and 122".nitrofurantoin monohydrate/macrocrystals 100 mg capsuleColor: light gray,light brownShape: oblongImprint: MYLAN  3422 MYLAN  3422This medicine is a ivory black, oblong, capsule imprinted with "logo and 122" and "logo and 122".nitrofurantoin monohydrate/macrocrystals 100 mg capsuleColor: Shape: oblongImprint: WATSON 3658This medicine is a ivory black, oblong, capsule imprinted with "logo and 122" and "logo and 122". Next Free RX CouponSave up to 80% on your prescriptions. View FREE WebMDRx coupon Available coupons Save up to 80% on your prescription with  WebMDRx  View FREE WebMDRx coupon You Might Also Like HIV Medications  What Are the Symptoms of Mantle Cell Lymphoma? Related Links List Nitrofurantoin MONO-MACRO side effects by likelihood and severity  Who should not take Nitrofurantoin MONO-MACRO?  Should I avoid certain foods while taking Nitrofurantoin MONO-MACRO?  What should I know regarding pregnancy, nursing and administering Nitrofurantoin MONO-MACRO to children or the elderly?  What conditions does Nitrofurantoin MONO-MACRO treat?  Search Drugs  Related Drugs Common Searches  Adderall  Celexa  Cipro  Cymbalta  Flexeril  Hydrocodone  Prilosec  Prozac  Seroquel  Synthroid  Tramadol  Trazodone  Lexapro  Lisinopril  Mobic  Naproxen  Neurontin  Pradaxa  Prednisone  Vicodin  Warfarin  Wellbutrin  Xanax  Zocor  Zoloft  Show More  Show Less  Select a condition to view a list of medication options  bladder infection caused by Enterobacter  urinary tract infection prevention  infection of the urinary tract caused by Enterococcus  urinary tract infection due to E. coli bacteria  urinary tract infection caused by Klebsiella bacteria  urinary tract infection caused by Staphylococcus aureus  Staphylococcus saprophyticus infection of urinary tract  bacterial urinary tract infection  a bacterial infection  View More  Drug Survey  Are you currently using Nitrofurantoin MONO-MACRO? YesNo This survey is being conducted by the WebMD marketing sciences department.  Selected from data included with permission and copyrighted by First Databank, Inc. This copyrighted material has been downloaded from a licensed data provider and is not for distribution, except as may be authorized by the applicable terms of use.  CONDITIONS OF USE: The information in this database is intended to supplement, not substitute for, the expertise and judgment of healthcare professionals. The information is not intended to cover all possible uses, directions, precautions, drug interactions or adverse effects, nor should it be construed to indicate that use of a particular drug is safe, appropriate or effective for you or anyone else. A healthcare professional should be consulted before taking any drug, changing any diet or commencing or discontinuing any course of treatment. Today on WebMD Medications That Make You Tired  Common culprits and what you can do.  Pharmacy and Medication Tips  Things to remember when you fill your prescription.  Medication Side Effects  Tips for dealing with them.  Reading Medicine Labels  How to make sense of them. More About Drugs and MedicationsPill IdentifierMy MedicineInteraction CheckerDrugs and Medications A-ZDrugs and Medical ConditionsLatest Drug NewsFind a Pharmacy Find a Vitamin Health Solutions from Our Sponsors Penis Curved When Erect?  Could I have CAD?  Treat Bent Fingers  Treat HR+, HER2- MBC  Tired of Dandruff?  Benefits of CBD  Rethink MS Treatment  AFib-Related Strokes  Risk of a Future DVT/PE  Is My Penis Normal?  Relapsing MS Options  Liver Transplants Save Lives  Finance Plastic Surgery  Bent Finger Causes  Living With Psoriasis?  Missing Teeth? More from WebMD 5 Tips to Help With Relapsing MS  How to Thrive With Narcolepsy  Relief for Blocked Hair Follicles  Psoriatic Arthritis and Your Sleep  What Psoriasis Feels Like  First Psoriatic Arthritis Flare  Talking to Your Doctor About RA  Crohn's: A 'Full-Body' Disease  Avoiding Crohn’s Flares  Health Benefits of Hemp Seed Oil  Live Better With Psoriatic Disease  Types of B-Cell Therapy for MS  5 Health Benefits of Hemp  Why Prostate Cancer Spreads  Living with Advanced Breast Cancer  Where Breast Cancer Spreads  Find us on:  Facebook  Twitter  Pinterest  Policies  Privacy Policy  Cookie Policy  Editorial Policy  Advertising Policy  Correction Policy  Terms of Use  About  Contact Us  About WebMD  Careers  Newsletter  Corporate  WebMD Health Services  Site Map  Accessibility  Our Apps  WebMD Mobile  WebMD App  Pregnancy  Baby  Allergy  For Advertisers  Advertise with Us  Advertising Policy © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, an Internet Brands company. All rights reserved.WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information. 








