Document Name: role of Tri-Sept P in Eye Cream2
Document link: https://formulaeprescott.com/products/tri-balm



























      

      Tri-Balm | Cleanse. Exfoliate. Moisturize.
–
 FP
    
















































































 






Skip to content







SIGN UP TO OUR NEWSLETTER FOR 15% OFF YOUR FIRST PURCHASE    





















Congratulations! Your order qualifies for free shipping

      Spend 
    £50
   more for free shipping
    






























Cart


£0.00


      (0)
    















Shop




Our Story




Reviews






















Rewards




Blog




Contact











My Account





Cart


£0.00


      (0)
    



















    Currency
  


        GBP £



ALL L




AMD դր.




ANG ƒ




AUD $




AWG ƒ




AZN ₼




BAM КМ




BBD $




BDT ৳




BGN лв.




BIF Fr




BOB Bs.




BSD $




BWP P




BZD $




CAD $




CDF Fr




CHF CHF




CRC ₡




CVE $




CZK Kč




DJF Fdj




DKK kr.




DOP $




DZD د.ج




EGP ج.م




ETB Br




EUR €




FJD $




FKP £




GBP £




GMD D




GNF Fr




GTQ Q




GYD $




HKD $




HNL L




HUF Ft




IDR Rp




ILS ₪




INR ₹




ISK kr




JMD $




JPY ¥




KES KSh




KGS som




KHR ៛




KMF Fr




KRW ₩




KYD $




KZT 〒




LAK ₭




LBP ل.ل




LKR ₨




MAD د.م.




MDL L




MKD ден




MMK K




MNT ₮




MUR ₨




MVR MVR




MWK MK




MYR RM




NGN ₦




NIO C$




NPR ₨




NZD $




PEN S/.




PGK K




PHP ₱




PKR ₨




PLN zł




PYG ₲




RON Lei




RSD РСД




RWF FRw




SBD $




SEK kr




SGD $




SLL Le




STD Db




THB ฿




TJS ЅМ




TOP T$




TTD $




TWD $




TZS Sh




UAH ₴




UGX USh




USD $




UYU $




UZS 




VND ₫




VUV Vt




WST T




XAF Fr




XCD $




XOF Fr




YER ﷼







My Account









Shop



Our Story



Reviews



Rewards



Blog



Contact













Cart













 
Congratulations! Your order qualifies for free shipping

            Spend 
          £50
         more for free shipping
          





Your cart is empty.








    Continue browsing
  























            
            
              
            We think you'll love
            
             
          








 Tri-Balm Duo
        £94.00





−

+











            Special instructions for seller
          

Special instructions for seller





    Estimate shipping
  












Country



Province



Postal/Zip Code










  Shipping, taxes & discount codes calculated at checkout




 
          Checkout
          •
          £0.00




   Continue Shopping
       

















Home
›
Shop all
›
Tri-Balm Stick










Zoom










Zoom










Zoom










Zoom










Zoom










Zoom










Zoom

































Tri-Balm Stick














Size
Essential Stick-70g



Essential Stick-70g





Mini Stick-20g







              Essential Stick-70g
          

              Mini Stick-20g
          




Subscription



One-time purchase£55.00





15
Subscribe



















                    
                Save
                15%






Delivery every 30 Days



Delivery every 60 Days



Delivery every 90 Days



Delivery every 30 Days


Delivery every 60 Days


Delivery every 90 Days
















−

+







              Add to Cart
            
•
£55.00







 












          Description
        




A luxurious facial balm which cleanses, exfoliates and moisturises in one simple step. Formulated using the purest premium ingredients, Tri-Balm nourishes and nurtures skin to give a healthy glowing complexion.
Inspired by the healing powers of nature, Tri-Balm contains no harmful chemicals, parabens, silicones or synthetics. Easy to use, non-spill and suitable for all skin types, Tri-Balm is the ultimate multi-purpose product.
Our 3-in-1 Facial Balm does the following:

• Cleanse with a blend of botanical oils, starflower, and oats to remove impurities and make-up.• Exfoliate with enzymes from pumpkin seeds to freshen and brighten skin.• Moisturise with hyaluronic acid combined with natural antioxidants to protect the skin.




Read more






              FAQ
            

What is Tri-Balm?

Tri-Balm is an award-winning face balm designed to cleanse, exfoliate, and moisturize your skin in one simple step. On top of that, it can also be used an intensive hydrating mask. 

The 3-in-1 nutrient-rich balm leaves clear and radiant and its lightweight, stick applicator is easy to use and travel with. 

Is it suitable for all skin types?

Yes it’s suitable skin types, and like all products in our range, it’s gender neutral. We advise customers with allergies to check the full ingredients list before purchasing.

When do I use it?

You can use Tri-Balm as part of your morning and evening regimen or whenever you want to refresh your skin. 

Can I over exfoliate? 

You can never over exfoliate with Tri-Balm because it only exfoliates to a dermal level. So you’re free to use as much as your skin needs. 

Does it remove eye make-up?

Tri-Balm will effectively remove all eye-make up (including waterproof mascara) without irritation. But, as with all oil-based cleansers, avoid getting the product into your eyes.

Is it hygienic?

Very. The Tri-Balm formula is water free so bacteria can’t grow in it. 

How is it best to apply Tri-Balm?

To cleanse, we recommend running your fingers over the balm, applying to skin and then using water or a hot cloth to emulsify off – or wipe away with a dry cloth, cotton pad or tissue. It can also be applied straight from the stick, but be careful not to use too much product this way.

If you want to use it as a stand-alone moisturizer, apply a smaller amount and let the balm absorb into the skin rather than rinsing or wiping away.

Adding a small amount of Tri-Balm to your foundation will create a desirable dewy effect.

What should I do if the Tri-Balm slips to bottom of the stick applicator and can’t be reached?

We recommend keeping the balm cool to prevent it from melting and slipping to the bottom of the container. If this does happen, turn it upside down and leave it in a hot place so that it can remould at the top. Alternatively, remove the bottom of the container and access the product there.

If you live a in a warm climate, you might find it more convenient to use our Tri-Blam jar, which comes with a 100% recyclable spatula. Otherwise, remember to keep it in the fridge.

Is Tri-Balm perfumed?

There’s no perfume in any of our products, but many of the essential oils we use have an uplifting natural scent. Tri-Balm features essential oils of mandarin, which has a sweet citrus fragrance, and geranium, with rosy herbaceous notes. Mandarin oil helps tone skin and is antibacterial, so it’s great for healing breakouts. Geranium oil restores balance by decreasing the over production of sebum (the skins natural protective oil). Geranium oil also a natural astringent, which by contracting blood vessels reduces inflammation. In this way, it helps tone and tighten skin ultimately providing anti-aging (or an age-positive) function.

Why does my skin feel tight after rinsing Tri-Balm off?

Changes in weather, the introduction of heating and being at high altitude can sometimes make skin feel dry. If your skin feels taut after rinsing Tri-Balm with water, we recommend just using a cotton pad to remove it or leaving a thin layer on your skin to help keep it moist and hydrated. 

Is Tri-Balm effective on sensitive skin, menopausal skin and for sufferers of rosacea and acne?

All our products are natural and contain no harmful chemicals, parabens, silicones, synthetics or artificial fragrance – so irritation shouldn’t happen or will be minimal. However, we can’t guarantee that all our ingredients are right for everyone. If you suffer from any allergies or have experienced irritation in response to a specific ingredient in the past, please check our fill list of ingredients here.  If you’re unsure, or if you think you may be allergic to any of the ingredients, please seek advice from your doctor or dermatologist. 
Tri-Balm contains essential oils, but is otherwise a very gently formula. These are the main ingredients in Tri-Balm and their benefits:

Sweet almond oil has been used for centuries to treat dry skin conditions, including eczema and psoriasis. It’s also known to Improve acne. Its fatty acids can help dissolve excess oil on the skin, while the retinoids improve cell turnover, which may reduce the appearance of acne.

Sunflower oil is a good way to obtain the benefits of vitamin E for the skin. It’s an antioxidant that can help protect the skin from free radicals and it won’t clog pores. The linoleic acid in sunflower oil makes it good at protecting skin against bacteria and germs without irritation. 

Vitamin E  is a powerful anti-inflammatory that attacks free radicals. It has healing benefits that help sooth and calm the skin whilst strengthening the skin barrier function.

Mandarin essential oil not only smells fantastic but also helps tone skin and is antibacterial in nature – so it’s great at healing breakouts.

Geranium oil restores balance by decreasing the over production of sebum (the skins natural protective oil). Geranium oil is also a natural astringent, which by contracting blood vessels reduces inflammation. In this way, it helps tone and tighten skin ultimately providing anti-aging (or an age-positive) function.

My skin is oily so should I use an oil-based product?

Yes, oil cleansers are great for oily skin – especially Tri-Balm! It contains two oils that actively prevent and heal breakouts: geranium oil helps regulate oil production and reduces inflammation, while mandarin oil has antibacterial and healing properties. 

Are oils good for hydrating skin?

Oils are incredibly effective skin hydrators and softeners. One third the Tri-Balm’s formulation is focused on hydration and these are the sources.  

Rice bran oil deeply penetrates the skin to improve elasticity. It’s rich in vitamin B complex (which helps stimulate circulation), vitamin E (which improves skin texture and tone), and nourishing essential fatty acids.

English oil blend is a blend of active oils native to the England, including NorOmega Gold, specifically blended to deliver high levels of topical nutrition to the skin. This skin nurturing cocktail is enriched with blackcurrant, starflower, echium and healing, hydrating oat. 

Sodium hyaluronate (the soluble form of hyaluronic acid) holds 1000 times its weight in water, so it attracts moisture and binds it to the skin. Naturally present in the body, 50% of hyaluronic acid is found in the skin’s collagen. Its role is to keep the skin plump and hydrated. It also helps stimulate hydrating retinoic acid and boost collagen synthesis.

Sweet almond oil has been used for centuries to treat dry skin conditions, including eczema and psoriasis. It’s also known to Improve acne. Its fatty acids can help dissolve excess oil on the skin, while the retinoids improve cell turnover which may reduce the appearance of acne.

Why does the texture of Tri-Balm in the Lux jar feel slightly different to the 70g stick?

Tri-Balm is now classified vegan, but when we first launched it wasn’t. As a result, the formula has changed every so slightly. So depending on when you first bought your Tri-Balm, you may experience a mild difference in texture. 

Is it safe to use Tri-Balm during pregnancy?

There are essential oils in Tri-Balm and most mothers-to-be are advised to avoid essential oils in the first trimester. We recommend you contact your doctor to get definitive advice on essential oils just to be safe. A full list of Tri-Balm ingredients can be found here. 





















































WHEN TO USE
Melts makeup off when used as a cleanser. Gently roll the balm onto the skin and massage the cleanser to remove makeup. Rinse off or wipe off with a warm wet cloth.
HOW TO USE
Straight from the stick or jar. Apply to face and neck. Then gently massage using upward circular movements. Facial massage helps to promote healthy, glowing skin.
OTHER USES
Leave on as a mask for extra hydration. Use on cuticles and dry hands to comfort and heal. Mix a little with foundation for a lovely dewy complexion. Great on flights and high altitudes to lock moisture in. Also great as a shave balm. 






























                    Key Ingredients
                  

All our formulas are consciously crafted from organic, active ingredients that deliver multiple benefits and transformative skin results.



















              Almond Oil
Rich in Vitamin A and gently removes impurities







              Botanicals
Contains vitamins and antioxidants to moisturise, cleanse and smooth skin







              Mandarin
Helps to brighten the skin







              Poppy Seed Oil
Rich in antioxidants protecting the skin from free radical damage







              Pomegranate
Rich in Vitamin C to nourish and brighten the skin







              Sea Buckthorn Oil
Rich in Vitamin E which deeply hydrates and plumps the skin







              Oat Oil Lipids
Heals and moisturises the skin







See full ingredients 
 
X
All Ingredients

Rice Bran & Carrot Tissue Oil, Blackcurrant Oat & Echium, Pumpkin Enzyme, Sodium Hyaluronate, Geranium & Mandarin Essential Oils, Helianthus Annuus (Sunflower) Seed Oil, Cetearyl Alcohol, Prunus Amygdalus Dulcis (Sweet Almond) Kernel Oil, Caprylic/Capric Triglyceride, Peg-6 Caprylic/Capric Glycerides, Acetylatyed Glyceryl Stearate/Palmitate, Sorbitan Stearate, Triticum Vulgare (Wheat) Germ Oil, Euphorbia Cerifera (Candililla) Cera, Stearic Acid, Peg-60 Almond Glycerides, Oryza Sativa (Rice) Bran Oil, Silica, Flower Oil, Copernicia Cerifera (Carnauba) Cera, Myrica Cerifera (Bayberry) Fruit Wax, Tocopherol, Limonene, Brassica Napus (Rapeseed) Seed Oil, Camelina Sativa (Gold Of Pleasure) Seed Oil, Crambe Abyssinica (Cramble) Seed Oil, Citronellol, Borago Officinalis (Borage) Seed Oil, Geraniol, Linalool, Leuconostoc/Radish Root Ferment Filtrate, May Contain Daucus Carota






















We think you’ll also love



                      Related products


                      Recently viewed


See all


See all






















                Main Menu
                



Shop


Our Story


Reviews


Rewards


Blog


Contact





                Other
                



FAQ


Privacy Policy


Shipping & Returns


Terms


Affiliate Program


Affiliate Publishers





                About us
                

High-performance, multi-tasking  formulations which naturally nourish the skin and simplify your routine. 



                Newsletter
                


Join our skincare community and enjoy exclusive benefits.





Email


Join








Facebook





Instagram











©
          
            Franline Ltd
            2023


DESIGNED & BUILT BY
          SUPERCO





Amazon
Amazon payments


American Express
American express


Apple Pay
Apple pay


Diners Club
Diners club


Discover
Discover


Google Pay
Google pay


Maestro
Maestro


Mastercard
Master


PayPal
Paypal


Shop Pay
Shopify pay


Union Pay
Unionpay


Visa
Visa
















Search
















































