Document Name: role of Cetyl Alcohol in Foundation Cream3
Document link: https://www.cosmeticsinfo.org/ingredients/cetyl-alcohol/









Cetyl Alcohol - Cosmetics Info








































 










Skip to content










THE SCIENCE & SAFETY BEHIND YOUR FAVORITE PRODUCTS                        



Safety Basics 
What’s In My Products 
Get the Facts 
Regulation & Oversight 
About Us 
Multimedia 











Find An Ingredient






















ProductsWhat’s In My Products

Shelf Life
Baby

Baby Lotions, Oils, Powders and Creams
Baby Shampoos


Bath

Bath Capsules, Oils, Tablets and Salts
Bubble Baths


Eye Makeup

Eyeliner
Eye Color
Eye Makeup Remover
Eyebrow Pencil
Mascara


Facial Makeup

Cheek Color
Concealers
Face Powders
Foundations
Lip Color


Fragrance

Colognes, Perfumes, and Fragrance Mists
Dusting Powders or Body Powders


Hair Care

Hair Conditioners
Hair Sprays
Hair Straighteners and Relaxers
Permanent Waves
Shampoos and Rinses
Tonics and Dressings


Hair Dye and Hair Coloring

Hair Bleaches
Hair Dyes and Colors
Hair Tints, Rinses and Shampoos


Nail

Artificial Nail Extension Products
Cuticle Oils, Creams and Lotions
Manicure and Pedicure Products
Nail Polish and Enamel and Removers


Oral Care

Mouthwashes and Breath Fresheners
Toothpastes


Personal Cleanliness

Antiperspirants and Deodorants
Douches
Feminine Deodorants
Soap


Shaving

Aftershave Lotion
Preshave Lotions (all types)
Shaving Creams
Shaving Soap


Skin Care

Body and Hand Creams and Lotions
Cleansers
Face and Neck Creams/Lotions
Foot Powders and Sprays
Moisturizers


Sunscreens and Sunless Tanners

Sunless Tanners
Sunscreen Frequently Asked Questions
Sunscreens: How to Read a Label, Expert Tips, etc.










Cetyl Alcohol
SHARE THIS


Overview
Safety
Resources



What Is It?
Cetearyl Alcohol, Cetyl Alcohol, Myristyl Alcohol and Behenyl Alcohol are white, waxy solids. Isostearyl Alcohol is a clear liquid. Cetyl Alcohol and Stearyl Alcohol are the two major components of Cetearyl Alcohol. These ingredients are all fatty alcohols and that are widely used in cosmetics and personal care products, especially in skin lotions and creams.
Why is it used in cosmetics and personal care products?
Cetearyl Alcohol and the other fatty alcohols keep an emulsion from separating into its oil and liquid components. These ingredients are also used to alter the thickness of liquid products and to increase foaming capacity or to stabilize foams.

Scientific Facts:
Cetearyl, Cetyl, Myristyl and Behenyl Alcohols are straight-chain alcohols. Isostearyl Alcohol is a branched chain alcohol. Cetearyl Alcohol is a mixture of mostly of Cetyl and Stearyl Alcohols, which are fatty alcohols that occur naturally in small quantities in plants and animals.
Myristyl Alcohol is a 14 carbon chain. Cetyl Alcohol has 16 carbons, while Stearyl and Isostearyl Alcohols have 18 carbons. Behenyl Alcohol is the largest fatty alcohol in this group with 22 carbons.



Safety Information:
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) includes synthetic fatty alcohols including Cetyl Alcohol, Stearyl Alcohol and Myristyl Alcohol on its list of food additives permitted for direct addition to food as multipurpose food additives. Synthetic fatty alcohols are also permited as indirect food additives as adjuvants and production aids.
The safety of Cetearyl Alcohol, Cetyl Alcohol, Isostearyl Alcohol, Myristyl Alcohol and Behenyl Alcohol has been assessed by the Cosmetic Ingredient Review (CIR) Expert Panel. The CIR Expert Panel evaluated the scientific data and concluded that these fatty alcohols were safe for use as cosmetic ingredients.
In 2005, the CIR Expert Panel considered available new data on Cetearyl Alcohol and the other fatty alcohols and reaffirmed the above conclusion.
More safety Information:
CIR Safety Review: The CIR Expert Panel noted that much is known about the biological activities of fatty acids and long-chain aliphatic alcohols and esters.
The toxicological data for the five long-chain aliphatic alcohols included in this report (Cetearyl Alcohol, Cetyl Alcohol, Isostearyl Alcohol, Myristyl Alcohol, Behenyl Alcohol) revealed no significant toxicity. For example, Cetyl Alcohol was not mutagenic. Formulations containing these fatty alcohols were not dermal irritants or sensitizers. Assuming that the five ingredients are of the same grade of purity, the similar chemical structure permits extrapolation of data for one of the alcohols to the remaining four alcohols. Thus, the CIR Expert Panel considered it reasonable to assume that the fatty alcohols reviewed in this report have equivalent biological activity.
FDA: Link to Code of Federal Regulations for synthetic fatty alcohols including Cety, Stearyl and Myristyl Alcohols  

Synthetic Fatty Alcohols 
Fatty Alcohols, Synthetic 

If they are derived from plants, Cetearyl, Cetyl, Isostearyl, Myristyl and Behenyl Alcohols may be used in cosmetics and personal care products marketed in Europe according to the general provisions of the Cosmetics Regulation of the European Union.
Ingredients of animal origin must comply with European Union animal by-products regulations.

More Scientific Information:
Cetearyl, Cetyl, Isostearyl, Myristyl and Behenyl alcohols are fatty alcohols. They are produced from natural fats and oils by reduction of the fatty acid carboxyl group (-COOH) to the hydroxyl (-OH) function. Alternately, several completely synthetic routes yield fatty alcohols which may be structurally identical or similar to the naturally-derived alcohols.
Fatty alcohols generally are primary alcohols conforming to the structure RCH2OH; where the R group varies with each individual alcohol. Those fatty alcohols prepared from naturally occurring fatty acids normally contain an even number of carbon atoms. Fatty alcohols are used as emollients in numerous types of cosmetics. They are valuable as co-emulsifiers and are employed to increase the viscosity of emulsions, shampoos and other products.



Resources:
Find out more about the regulation of Food Additives by the Food and Drug Administration

Food Ingredients and Packaging
Food Contact Substances
Substances Generally Recognized As Safe (GRAS)
Search the Code of Federal Regulations 
EU Cosmetics Inventory 











Product Types 
Baby
Bath
Eye Makeup
Facial Makeup
Fragrance
Hair Care
Hair Color
Nail
Oral Care
Personal Cleanliness
Shaving
Skin Care
Sun Protection



Resources 
History of Cosmetics
FAQs
Sustainability Report
Resources
Multimedia



About Us 
IMPORTANT LEGAL NOTICE
About Us
Privacy









                © 2023 All Rights Reserved.  Cosmeticsinfo.org
            










