Document Name: role of Monawet MO-70R in Protective Cream0
Document link: https://www.atamanchemicals.com/dioctyl-sodium-sulfosuccinate_u24516/



















DIOCTYL SODIUM SULFOSUCCINATE - Ataman Kimya















+90 216 577 10 10
info@atamanchemicals.com


KVKK Politikası
Information Society Services
Human Resources











PRODUCTS











Categories

Detergents, Cosmetics, Disinfectants, Pharmaceutical Chemicals
Water Treatment, Metal and Mining Chemicals
Paint, Construction, Plastics, Rubber Chemicals
Textile, Leather, Paper and Industrial Chemicals
Crop Protection, Food, Feed and Flavor Chemicals
Other Industries







NEWS


CORPORATE


CONTACT

















Quick Search



















PRODUCTS





PRODUCTS
Detergents, Cosmetics, Disinfectants, Pharmaceutical Chemicals
DIOCTYL SODIUM SULFOSUCCINATE
Return to Product List




1-9
A-D
E-G
H-M
N-P
Q-S
T-Z



DIOCTYL SODIUM SULFOSUCCINATE




DIOCTYL SODIUM SULFOSUCCINATE
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate (DSS) is an anionic surfactant substance that traditionally has been recommended as a laxative and stool softener for a variety of vertebrates ranging from humans to rodents. DSS has been advocated for the same use in reptiles.

CAS NO: 1639-66-3
EC NO:216-684-0
IUPAC NAME:
sodium;1,4-dioctoxy-1,4-dioxobutane-2-sulfonate
SYNONYMS
Dioctyl sodiosulfosuccinat;Dioctyl sodium sulphosuccinate;Dioctyl sulfosuccinate, sodium salt;Sodium bis(octyl)sulfosuccinate;Sodium di-n-octyl sulfosuccinate;Sodium dioctyl sulfosuccinate;Sodium O,O-dioctylsulfosuccinic acid;Sodium sulfosuccinic acid dioctyl ester;Sulfosuccinic acid 1,4-dioctyl ester sodium salt;1639-66-3;Bu-cerumen;DI-N-OCTYL SODIUM SULFOSUCCINATE;Solbaleite;Butyl-cerumen;Elfanol 883;Butanedioic acid, sulfo-, 1,4-dioctyl ester, sodium salt;sulfonated aliphatic polyester;Succinic acid, sulfo-, dioctyl ester, sodium salt;Texapon DOS;Succinic acid, sulfo-, 1,4-dioctyl ester, sodium salt;sodium;1,4-dioctoxy-1,4-dioxobutane-2-sulfonate;Neocol SW 30;Caswell No. 392I;Butanedioic acid, 2-sulfo-, 1,4-dioctyl ester, sodium salt (1:1);Sodium di-n-octylsulfosuccinate;HSDB 4086;NSC 7779;EINECS 216-684-0;EPA Pesticide Chemical Code 079027;Dioktylester sulfojantaranu sodneho [Czech];Dioktylester sulfojantaranu sodneho;1,4-Bis(n-octyl) sulfobutanedioate, sodium salt;SCHEMBL22809;DTXSID7041881;Sulfobutanedioic acid, 1,4-di(n-octyl) ester, sodium salt;2-(Sodiosulfo)succinic acid dioctyl;Q272606771,4-Bis[(2-éthylhexyl)oxy]-1,4-dioxo-2-butanesulfonate de sodium [French] [ACD/IUPAC Name];216-684-0 ;577-11-7;Aerosol OT 100;Aerosol OT 75PG ;Aerosol OT-S ;Airrol CT 1;Airrol OP ;Astrowet 608;Astrowet O 70PG;Astrowet O 75 ;Bis(2-ethylhexyl) Sulfosuccinate Sodium Salt;BIS(2-ETHYLHEXYL) SULFOSUCCINATE, SODIUM SALT;Bis(2-ethylhexyl)sodium sulfosuccinate;Butanedioic acid, 2-sulfo-, 1,4-bis(2-ethylhexyl) ester, sodium salt (1:1) ;Di(2-ethylhexyl)sulfosuccinic acid, sodium salt;Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate [Wiki];Dioctyl sulfosuccinate sodium salt;DIOX;docusate sodique [French] [INN];Docusate sodium [BAN] [INN] [USAN] [USP];Docusate sodium salt;docusato de sodio [Spanish] [INN];Docusato sodico [Spanish] [INN];Docusatum natricum [Latin];Drewfax 007 ;Empimin OP 70 ;Empimin OT 75 ;Freetex OT ;Gemtex SC ;Gemtex SC 40;Geropon DOS;Geropon SS-O 75;Geropon WT 27;Isoprotanc ;Jamylene;Lankropol KO 2;Lumiten I-RA;Lutensit A-BO;Lutensi-BOS;Manoxol;Manoxol OP;Marlinat DF 8;Monawet MO 70;Monawet MO 70E;Monawet MO 70R;natrii docusas [Latin] [INN];Natrium-1,4-bis[(2-ethylhexyl)oxy]-1,4-dioxo-2-butansulfonat [German] [ACD/IUPAC Name];Neocol P;Neocol YSK;Neopelex OTP;Newkalgen EP 60P;Newkalgen EP 70G;Nikkol OTP 100;NK-EP 70G;Octowet;Pelex OT;Pelex OT-P;Pentex 99;Persol KMN 3;Pionin A 51B;Rapisol A 30;Rapisol A 80;Rapisol B 30;Rapisol B 80;Rapisol B 90;Rewopol SBDO 70;Sanmorin OT 70N;Sanseparer 100;Sodium 1,4-bis[(2-ethylhexyl)oxy]-1,4-dioxo-2-butanesulfonate [ACD/IUPAC Name];Sodium 1,4-bis[(2-ethylhexyl)oxy]-1,4-dioxobutane-2-sulfonate;sodium bis(2-ethylhexyl) sulfosuccinate;Sodium Di(2-ethylhexyl) Sulfosuccinate;sodium dioctyl sulfosuccinate;Sodium Docusate;Solovet;Solusol;Spilon 8;Succinate STD;Sulfobutanedioic acid 1,4-bis(2-ethylhexyl) ester sodium salt;Sulfosuccinic Acid 1,4-Bis(2-ethylhexyl) Ester S-Sodium Salt;Sunnol LDF 110;Triton GR 5;Valsol OT;Warcowet 060;докузат натрия [Russian] [INN];多库酯钠 [Chinese] [INN];1,4-bis(2-ethylhexyl) sodium sulfosuccinate;Alcopol O;Alkasurf SS-O 75;Alphasol OT;BIS(2-ETHYLHEXYL) SODIUM SULFOSUCCINATE;Bis(2-ethylhexyl) S-sodium sulfosuccinate;Bis(2-ethylhexyl) sulphosuccinatesodium salt;Bis(2-ethylhexyl)sulfosuccinate sodium salt;Bis-2-ethylhexylester sulfojantaranu sodneho [Czech];Butanedioic acid, sulfo-, 1,4-bis(2-ethylhexyl) ester, sodium salt;Celanol DOS 65;Celanol DOS 75;Clestol;Colace [Trade name] [Wiki];Constonate;Coprol;Defilin;DESS;Dialose;Dialose Plus;Dioctlyn;Dioctyl sulfosuccinate, sodium salt;Dioctyl sulphosuccinate sodium salt;Dioctylal;Dioctyl-medo forte;Dioctylsulfosuccinate sodium salt;Diomedicone;Diosuccin;Diotilan;Diovac;docusate sodique;docusato de sodio;Dorbantyl;doss;Doxan;Doxinate;Doxol;Dulsivac;Duosol;Ferro-Sequels;Humifen WT 27G;Kosate;Laxcaps;Laxinate;Laxinate 100;Manoxal OT;Manoxol OT;Mervamine;MFCD00012455 [MDL number];Modane Plus;Modane soft;Molatoc;Molcer;Molofac;Monawet MD 70E;Monawet MO-70;Monawet MO-70 RP;Monawet MO-84 R2W;Monoxol OT;Natrii dioctylsulfosuccinas;natrii docusas;NeklWT-27;Nevax;Nikkol OTP 70;Norval [Trade name];Obston;Peri-Colace;Phillips Gelcaps;Rapisol;Regutol;Requtol;Revac;Sanmorin OT 70;SBO;Senokap DSS;Senokot S;Sobital;Sodium 1,4-bis((2-ethylhexyl)oxy)-1,4-dioxobutane-2-sulfonate;sodium 1,4-bis(2-ethylhexoxy)-1,4-dioxobutane-2-sulfonate;Sodium di-(2-ethylhexyl) sulfosuccinate;sodium;1,4-bis(2-ethylhexoxy)-1,4-dioxobutane-2-sulfonate;Softil;Sol sodowej sulfobursztynianu dwu-2-etyloheksylowego [Polish];Soliwax;Succinic acid, sulfo-, 1,4-bis(2-ethylhexyl) ester, sodium salt;Sulfimel DOS;Sulfobutanedioic acid bis(2-ethylhexyl ester) sodium salt;Sulfosuccinic acid bis(2-ethylhexyl) ester sodium salt;Sulfosuccinic acid, bis(2-ethylhexyl)ester sodium salt;Sulfosuccinic acid, di-(2-ethylhexyl) ester, sodium salt;Triton GR 7;Triton GR-5;Vatsol OT;Velmol;Waxsol;Wetaid SR;Docusate; abilax; aerosol ot; alphasol ot; anonaid t; bis(2 ethylhexyl)sulfosuccinate sodium; colace; colase; coloxyl; comfolax; constiban; coprol; coprolax; crolax; decerosol ot; defilin; delifin; delifine; di(n octyl)sodium sulfosuccinate; dioctylal; dioctyl medo; dioctylmedo; dioctyl polfa; dioctylpolfa; dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate; dioctylsodium sulfosuccinate; dioctyl sodium sulphosuccinate; dioctylsulfosuccinate; dioctyl sulfosuccinates; dioctyl sulfosuccinatesodium; dioctylsulfosuccinate sodium; dioctyl sulfosuccinic acid; diofectyl; diomedicone; diosuccin; diosuccine; diotilan; diotilane; diovac; disonate; disosul; disosul; doctynol; dons; doxinate; doxol; doxolan; doxolane; doxolpurdue frederick; dss; dulsivac; emulax simplex; eosan; humectol; laxinate100; manoxol ot; milkinol; modane soft; mollax; molofac; nevax; obston; physiolax; regal; regutol; senokot s; sodium bis(2 ethylhexyl)sulfosuccinate; sodium dioctyl sulfosuccinate; sodium dioctylsulfosuccinate; soffecine; softil; sulfosuccinic acid bis(2 ethylhexyl) ester sodium salt; vatsol ot; velmol; wasserlax; waxsol; Docusate Sodium; Correctol (trade); di sosul; dioctyl sulfosuccinate sodium; docusate; doxol purdue frederick; laxinate 100

DIOCTYL SODIUM SULFOSUCCINATE
 1.  EXPLANATION
 Dioctyl Sodium Sulfosuccinate (DSS) is the dioctyl ester ofsodium sulfosuccinate.  The pure compound is a white waxy solid, soluble in many organic solvents and in water.  It is an anionic  surface active compound, which has marked wetting characteristics.  Its detergent properties make it useful for cleaning and peeling  fruits and vegetables and cleaning food packaging.  It is also used in various pharmaceutical products.  The structure of DSS is shown in Figure 1.
    Figure 1.

                                        C2H5
                                        '
                               CH2COOCH2CH(CH2)3CH3
                                '
                       NaO3S - CHCOOCH2CH(CH2)3CH3
                                       '
                                       C2H5
The purpose of this communication is to direct attention to the usefulness of dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate (Aerosol O. T.), developed some 15 years ago, in the treatment of severe fecal impaction and lesser degrees of constipation. As one of the very first of the synthetic wetting agents it was originally popularly described in Life magazine without implication of medical usefulness, and readers may recall that its remarkable properties were illustrated by the cover picture of a duck sinking in water to which a small concentration of this material had been added. The effectiveness of this material for treating constipation is consequent to its ability to allow a hard fecal mass to be penetrated by water or by mineral oils so that it becomes effectively softened.
* It is an excellent dispersing, adhesive, wetting and emulsifying agent containing the active ingredient of Dioctyl Sodium Sulfosuccinate.
* Provides perfect mixing of pesticides and fertilizers with water.
* It provides homogeneous spreading of mahlul to the plant palm.
* In this way, it is ensured that the appropriate dose is distributed equally to the stomata.
* Increases the effectiveness of agricultural pesticides due to the dissolving feature of the kit.
* It dissolves and thins the protective layer on the harmful insects and allows pesticides to kill easily.
* This is a product that facilitates the work of the farmer and provides a definitive result, especially against pests such as red spiders, crustaceans and nemotodes, which are difficult to combat.
Dioctyl Sodium Sulfosuccinate  is used for the treatment, control, prevention, & improvement of the following diseases, conditions and symptoms;
-Prevention of dry and hard stools
-Occasional constipation relief
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate has been approved by the US FDA as a "generally recognized as safe" (GRAS) additive. It is used in a variety of food products, as a surface active agent, stabilizer, thickener, wetting agent, processing aid, solubilizing agent, emulsifier, and dispersant.
Overview
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate or docusate sodium  – often referred to as DSS, Aerosol OT or AOT – is a common ingredient in consumer products, especially laxatives of the stool softener type. It is also used as an emulsifying, wetting, and dispersing agent, as a pesticide, as well as a component of the oil dispersant Corexit which was used in the Deepwater Horizon oil spill of 2010.It is an anionic surfactant, a substance that lowers the surface tension of water.
Docusate calcium and docusate potassium, as well as other dioctyl sulfosuccinate salts[citation needed], are also widely used in the same areas.
Uses
Clinical use
Docusate is used to make stools softer and easier to pass. It is used in symptomatic treatment of constipation, and in painful anorectal conditions such as hemorrhoids and anal fissures for people avoiding straining during bowel movements. Patients taking docusate should drink plenty of water to irrigate the bowel, thereby increasing motility. Given orally, the effects are usually seen 1 to 3 days after the first dose. Given rectally, as an enema or suppository, a bowel movement usually occurs within 5 to 20 minutes.
The drug may be used in people who are undergoing opioid pain therapy, are opioid dependent, or on opioid replacement therapy, though prolonged use may cause irritation of the gastrointestinal tract. Data supporting its efficacy in treating chronic constipation is lacking.
Available forms
Docusate sodium is administered orally or rectally; in tablets, capsules, suppositories and enemas. It is also used as an emulsifier and dispersant in topical preparations.
Other uses
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate is a pesticide used popularly for crops of olives, almonds, wine grapes, corn and oranges.
It is used as an excipient in the production of tablets (as a lubricant) and suspensions (as an emulsifier).
It is the most widely used surfactant in reverse micelle encapsulation studies.
Docusate sodium, when used in conjunction with irrigation, is also an effective means of earwax removal.
Contraindications
Docusate is contraindicated in patients with appendicitis, acute abdomen or ileus. It is not suitable for the treatment of chronic constipation.

Physical and chemical properties
Solubility of dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate in water is 1:70 (14 g/l) at 25 °C, increasing to 1:20 at 70 °C. Solubility is better in less polar solvents: 1:30 in ethanol, 1:1 in chloroform and diethylether, and practically unlimited in petroleum ether (25 °C). It is also highly soluble in glycerol, although this is a rather polar solvent.
The ester groups are easily cleaved under basic conditions, but are stable against acids
Pharmacokinetics and mechanism of action
Docusate does not stay in the gastrointestinal tract, but is absorbed into the bloodstream and excreted via the gallbladder after undergoing extensive metabolism.
The effect of docusate may not necessarily be all due to its surfactant properties. Perfusion studies suggest that docusate inhibits fluid absorption or stimulates secretion in the portion of the small intestine known as the jejunum.
Interactions
Docusate should not be used in addition to mineral oil as the emulsifier will result in mineral oil being absorbed rather than functioning as a lubricant for the bowel walls, possibly resulting in foreign body granulomas. The substance might also increase resorption of other drugs, for example dantron (1,8-dihydroxyanthraquinone).
Toxicity
Toxicity for different species varies widely, but dioctyl sulfosuccinate biodegrades quickly in soil and water, a typical finding being >90% in 12 to 17 days. In the atmosphere, it is destroyed by a photochemical reaction with an estimated half-life of 18 hours.
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate [DSS) is an anionic detergent that is used widely as a laxative and promoted as a stool softener.
What Is It?
Diethylhexyl Sodium Sulfosuccinate, also called Dioctyl Sodium Sulfosuccinate or Sodium Docusate, is a waxy solid. It is used in the formulation of a wide variety of topical products, including bath products, blushers, body and hand preparations, foundations, shaving creams and skin-care products.
Why is it used in cosmetics and personal care products?
Diethylhexyl Sodium Sulfosuccinate enhances the water solubility of other cosmetic ingredients. It also helps form emulsions by reducing the surface tension of the substances to be emulsified and functions as a surfactant or cleansing agent.
Scientific Facts: 
Diethylhexyl Sodium Sulfosuccinate, often referred to as Dioctyl Sodium Sulfosuccinate, is an anionic surfactant used in a variety of applications, including cosmetics and personal-care products, over-the-counter (OTC) and prescription drugs, and as a food additive.
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate Uses
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate is used for preservative.
How Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate works
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate works as laxative by increasing the water content of the stool or increasing the secretion of water in the gut, thus promoting its passage. It also works as an ear wax softener by softening the dry and hardened ear wax. This eases wax removal and reduces discomfort inside the ear.
Description
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate, or DSS, works as a stool softener or laxative by reducing the surface tension of the impaction and permitting water to penetrate and soften the fecal mass.  It increases intestinal secretions and intestinal motility, aiding in its action.
Usage
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate is used to treat horses with fecal impaction and foals with meconium impaction.  The treatment varies with the location in the gastrointestinal tract and the severity of the impaction.
Precautions
Excess fluid accumulation or gastric reflux should be ruled out before oral administration of Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate because the horse may not be able to propel the fluid forward and may be accumulating excess fluid in the stomach or small intestine.
Because of the secretory effects that high doses can produce, hydration and electrolyte status should be carefully monitored and treated when necessary.
The performance of dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate (aerosol OT) in the development of a pharmaceutically acceptable, stable, self-emulsifying water continuous microemulsion with high dilution efficiency was assessed. A pseudoternary microemulsion system was constructed using aerosol OT/medium-chain triglycerides with oleic acid/glycerol monooleate and water. The model microemulsion was characterized with regard to its electroconductive behavior, eosin sodium absorption, interfacial tension, and droplet size measurements after dilution with water. The percolation transition law, which makes it possible to determine the percolation threshold and to identify bicontinuous structures, was applied to the system. The interfacial tension changes associated with the microemulsion formation revealed ultralow values up to 30% oil at a surfactant/cosurfactant ratio of 3∶1. Moreover, the investigated particle size and polydispersity using photon correlation spectroscopy after dilution with excess of the continuous phase proved the efficiency of the microemulsion system as a drug carrier that ensures an infinitely dilutable, homogeneous, and thermodynamically stable system.
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate is prescribed for the treatment of constipation in adults and children. Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate is also prescribed for the prophylaxis of constipation in MI patients or individuals who underwent anorectal surgery to facilitate defecation. Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate is also indicated for bowel evacuation prior to rectal and bowel examinations.
chemical properties    
white solid, often supplied as an aqueous solution
usage    
forms reverse micelles in hydrocarbon solvents; suitable for the solubilization of the major myelin transmembrane proteolipid
usage    
anticholinergic, treatment of motion sickness
general description    
odorless colorless to white waxy solid. sinks and mixes slowly with water.
air & water reactions    
mixes slowly with water.
reactivity profile    
docusate sodium causes foaming and spreading of water. assists in putting out fires by water.
health hazard
liquid is strong irritant to eye and may irritate skin by removing natural oils. ingestion causes diarrhea and intestinal bloating.
fire hazard    
behavior in fire: causes foaming and spreading of water. assists in putting out fires by water.
Sodium dioctyl sulfosuccinate Usage
1. Easily soluble in water, the solution is milky white, not resistant to strong acids, strong bases, heavy metal salts and reducing agents. It penetrates quickly and evenly. It has good wetting, penetrating, emulsifying and foaming properties. The penetration effect is the best when it is below 40℃, and it is easy to hydrolyze when it meets alkali at high temperature. The penetrant T is not resistant to strong alkalis and cannot be added directly to concentrated alkaline solution. The penetrant T should be added after diluting the alkaline solution.
2. This product is a highly effective penetrant, used to treat cotton, hemp, viscose and its blended products. The treated fabric is directly bleached or dyed without scouring, which can improve the dyeing defects caused by dead cotton. The fabric feels softer and fuller. When practicing green bleaching, the dyestuff should be withdrawn first to ensure the penetration effect.
3. If there is too much foam when penetrating agent T is used, a small amount of defoamer, GP or octanol, tributyl phosphate and other defoamers can be added.
4. Used for dyeing raw cotton; used for pesticide wettable powder.

Dioctyl Sodium Sulfosuccinate is an anionic surfactant used in a wide variety of cosmetic formulations. In September 1994, the Cosmetic Ingredient Review (CIR) Expert Panel evaluated the ingredient to be safe up to 0.42% in cosmetic formulations. Since that time, CIR received a petition to re-open the safety assessment based on new clinical data. This amendment is a compilation of data contained in the original plus the data received in the petition; the latter appear at the end of this document. Studies conducted in the 1940’s indicate that the oral LD50 in rats can be as low as 1.9 g/kg. Inhalation studies likewise had few findings.
Physical Properties
Dioctyl Sodium Sulfosuccinate has a molecular weight of 444.56 and appears as a waxy solid. It is soluble in both water and organic solvents, especially in water and water-miscible solvent combinations. Its water solubilities as a function of temperature are: 15 g/1 at 25°C, 23 g/1 at 40°C, 30 g/1 at 50°C, and 55 g/1 at 70°C. Acid and neutral solutions of Dioctyl Sodium Sulfosuccinate are stable; alkaline solutions hydrolyze (Budavari 1989). Results from mass, ’H-NMR, and 13C-NMR spectroscopy are available .
Food
Dioctyl Sodium Sulfosuccinate has a number of applications as a food additive, which are regulated by the FDA. Used as a wetting agent in fumaric acid-acidulated foods, Dioctyl Sodium Sulfosuccinate is limited to a maximum of 15 ppm in finished gelatin desserts or 10 ppm in finished beverages or fruit-juice drinks. It is used in the production of unrefined cane sugar and can be detected in the final juice, syrup, or massecuite product at concentrations of 0.5 ppm per 1% sucrose. It may be used at a concentration of 25 ppm in molasses. Noncarbonated beverages containing cocoa fat may use Dioctyl Sodium Sulfosuccinate as an emulsifying
agent, not to exceed 25 ppm in the finished beverage. Gums and hydrophilic colloids may be thickened with Dioctyl Sodium Sulfosuccinate, with a maximum concentration of 0.5% of gums or colloids by weight. As a diluent in color additive mixtures for food, Dioctyl Sodium Sulfosuccinate is limited to a concentration of 9 ppm in the finished product.
Other Uses
Dioctyl Sodium Sulfosuccinate has a broad range of uses as a detergent and an emulsifier. Applications include: wetting agents, antifog preparations, emulsion and suspension polymerizations, industrial cleaning solutions, battery separators, and film coating products 
SODIUM DIOCTILE SULPHOSUCCINATE USAGE AREAS:
*It is an excellent spreading, adhesive, wetting and emulsifying emulsifying agent.
*It is used as an enhancer of absorption and penetration.
*It is used to reduce surface tension.
*Provides perfect mixing of pesticides and fertilizers with water.
*It provides a homogeneous spread of the material to the plant foot.
*It increases the effectiveness of pesticides.
*It dissolves and thins the protective layer on the harmful insects and allows pesticides to kill easily.
*It helps the farmer to reach a definitive result, which facilitates the work of the farmer, especially against pests such as red spiders, crustaceans and nemotodes, which are difficult to combat.
*It is used as an excellent wetting agent in the textile industry.
*Improves dyeing caused by cotton that wears off after printing and dyeing.
*The fabric feels softer and fuller.
*It has many uses in the agricultural sector.
*It is water soluble. Provides a fast and even distribution, penetrating where it is used and providing a good wetting.
*Sodium dioctyl sulfosuccinate is used as a high yield penetrate in the treatment of cotton, hemp viscose and blended products.
Area of Use: Used as wetting agent, absorption and penetration enhancer, emulsifier, and surface tension reducer. As a powder, they are used as dispersant, color regulator, penetration enhancer. They gain lubricating properties at 100% usage. Compatible with microorganisms and enzymes
Melting Point: 173 - 179 C
DIOCTYL SODIUM SULFOSUCCINATE is a surface active raw material in solid form in the form of oily layers or cream and with an anionic structure with a unique odor.
 
DIOCTYL SODIUM SULFOSUCCINATE is used as an emulsifier, spreader and wetting agent in the production of cosmetics, detergents and many industrial products.
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate is used as a serial wetting agent in dye, finishing and pretreatment in the textile industry.
It has strong emulsion and wetting properties. Since it reduces the surface and inner surface tension, it can be used easily in applications that require fast wetting. Leather, gabardine, etc. 3 times faster (3-4 seconds) than normal wetting agents on thick fabrics.
Environmentally friendly,Sodium dioctyl sulfosuccinate can be removed completely by washing. It has high wetting ability in both cold and hot water. It is resistant to hard water, electrolytes, reducers and oxidizers.
Usage areas
Textile applications (Paint, finishing, pre-treatment)
Agricultural applications (Green-leaf plant protection, agricultural spraying)
Various chemistry applications
• It is an excellent dispersing, adhesive, wetting and emulsifying agent containing the active ingredient of sodium dioctyl sulfosuccinate (sodium dioctyl sulphosuccinate). • Provides perfect mixing of pesticides and fertilizers with water.
• It ensures that the mixture to be applied is spread homogeneously on the plant palm. In this way, it is ensured that the appropriate dose is distributed equally to the stomata.
• Increases the effectiveness of agricultural pesticides due to the dissolving feature of the kit.
• It dissolves and thins the protective layer on the harmful insects and enables pesticides to work easily.
• It facilitates the farmer's work against pests such as red spider, crustacean lice and nematodes, which are difficult to combat with these features.
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate is an anionic surfactant with a concentrated active substance content (70%) in propylene glycol (INCI name: Diethylhexyl Sodium Sulfosuccinate). It is a surfactant with limited water solubility. Due to its unique molecular structure, the product has a strong wetting effect on highly hydrophobic materials such as anthracite carbon.
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate is used a wetting agent. It effectively reduces interfacial tension even at low concentrations (low CMC). The presence of propylene glycol in this product increases the ignition temperature compared to solvent-based products. As a result, it is also more environmentally friendly.
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate has been widely used in the textile industry, mainly in wetting formulations. This surfactant increases the effectiveness of detergents when washing fibres, applying and peeling off sizing, as a fast-acting wetting agent in the dyeing process. It is effective even at low concentrations.
In mining it is used as a dust control agent for mine or transport dusts (roads in opencast mines). Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate enhances pigment dispersing properties of printer inks and improves their penetration. It is also used as a dispersant of dyes in plastics processing and hydrophobic resins.
In the agrochemical industry it is used as a wetting agent for plant protection products. Additionally, it has penetrating properties which improve the rate of pesticide absorption by the plant. Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate acts as an emulsifier in emulsion and suspension polymerization processes. It is a component of corrosion inhibitors. It can be used as an additive supporting dewatering of flotation concentrates during filtration and drying. In the construction industry it is a component of release additives to prevent the adhesion of freshly placed concrete to a forming surface. In concrete admixtures it is used as a wetting agent for cement grains.
The product is also used in the cosmetic industry as a versatile moisturizer. In formulations of colour cosmetics it is used for the production of eye contour pencils, nail varnishes and hair sprays.
Properties and applications
Product advantages:
effectively reduces interfacial tension and wetting angle,
very strong wetting effect on hydrophobic surfaces,
a safe product – due to the presence of propylene glycol and a higher flash point,
increases the effectiveness of detergents during washing,
very good dispersing and emulsifying properties,
Applications:
auxiliaries in the textile industry,
component of preparations for dewatering of flotation concentrates,
dust control,
emulsifier in emulsion polymerisation,
pigment dispersant,
construction industry,
component of plant protection products,
a component of cosmetic formulations,
printing inks.
Application
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate (DOSS) can be used as an anionic surfactant:
• To prepare microemulsion with sodium salt of 3-(cyclohexylamino)-2-hydroxy-1-propanesulfonic acid (CAPSO) for the electrophoresis detection of natural and synthetic estrogens.
• To develop reverse micelles.
• To enhance the electrical conductivity and cell attachment in polycaprolactone fumarate and polypyrrole (PCLF–PPy) composite materials.
Sodium-diethylhexyl-sulfosuccinate is the common chemical and pharmaceutical name of the anion bis(2-ethylhexyl) sulfosuccinate, also commonly called dioctyl sulfosuccinate (DOSS).
Salts of this anion, especially Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate, are widely used in medicine as laxatives and as stool softeners, by mouth or rectally. Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate is on the WHO List of Essential Medicines. It is a widely available and relatively inexpensive generic medication, with more than six million prescriptions in the US in 2017. Other Sodium-diethylhexyl-sulfosuccinate salts with medical use include those of calcium and potassium.
Sodium diethylhexyl sulfosuccinate salts are also used as food additives, emulsifiers, dispersants, and wetting agents, among other uses.
History
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate was patented in 1937 by Coleman R. Caryl and Alphons O. Jaeger for American Cyanamid,[4] which commercialized it for many years as a detergent under the brand name Aerosol OT.
Its use for the treatment of constipation was first proposed in 1955 by James L. Wilson and David G. Dickinson,[5] and quicky popularized under the name Doxinate.
Medical use
Constipation
The main medical use of Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate is to treat constipation, acting as a laxative and stool softener. In painful anorectal conditions such as hemorrhoid and anal fissures, it can help avoid pain caused by straining during bowel movements.
When administered by mouth, a bowel movement often occurs in 1 to 3 days, while rectal use may be effective within 20 minutes.
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate is recommended as a stool softener for children. However, its effectiveness for constipation is poorly supported by evidence. Multiple studies have found Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate to be no more effective than a placebo for improving constipation. Others have found it to be less useful for the treatment of chronic constipation than psyllium.
The medication may be given to people who are receiving opioid medication, although prolonged use may cause irritation of the gastrointestinal tract.
Other medical uses
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate, when used with ear syringing, may help with earwax removal, particularly in the case of impaction.
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate is also used as a lubricant in the production of tablets and as an emulsifier in topical preparations and other suspensions.
Chemistry
Structure and properties
The structural formula of the Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate anion is R−O−C(=O)−CH(SO−3)−CH2−C(=O)−O−R, where R is the 2-ethylhexyl group H3C−(CH2)3−C(−CH2−CH3)H−CH2−. The conjugate acid can be described as the twofold carboxylate ester of sulfosuccinic acid with 2-ethylhexanol.
The compound is a white, wax-like, plastic solid, with an odor suggestive of octyl alcohol. It starts to decompose at about 220 °C.[28]
Solubility of Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate in water is 14 g/L at 25 °C, increasing to 55 g/L at 70 °C.[28] Solubility is better in less polar solvents: 1:30 in ethanol, 1:1 in chloroform and diethylether, and practically unlimited in petroleum ether (25 °C). It also is highly soluble in glycerol, although this is a rather polar solvent. It is also highly soluble in xylene, oleic acid, acetone, diacetone alcohol, methanol, isopropanol, 2-butanol, methyl acetate, ethyl acetate, furfurol, and vegetable oils.
The ester groups are easily cleaved under basic conditions, but are stable against acids.
Synthesis
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate can be obtained by treating sodium bisulfite with dioctyl maleate. The bisulfite anion adds to the double bond:
−CH=CH− + HSO−3 → −CH(−SO−3)−CH2−
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate is the sodium salt of docusate, a dioctyl salt and an emollient laxative with stool-softening activity. Docusate decreases surface tension and emulsification of fecal matter and allows water to penetrate and mix with stool. As a result, it softens the stool.
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate is an odorless colorless to white waxy solid. Sinks and mixes slowly with water.
Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate's use as a wetting agent and food additive may result in its release to the environment through various waste streams. If released to soil, the expected mobility of Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate is low to very high. If released to water, Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate will be essentially nonvolatile. Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate has aqueous base-catalyzed hydrolysis half-lives of 243 days at pH of 8 and 6.7 years at pH of 7. Aquatic bioconcentration is not expected to be an important fate process although adsorption to sediment may be possible. Several studies have shown that Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate biodegrades rapidly. If released to the atmosphere, Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate will exist primarily in the particulate phase. In the vapor phase, it will degrade in the atmosphere by reaction with photochemically produced hydroxyl radicals with an estimated half-life of 18 hrs. Physical removal from air can occur through wet and dry deposition. Exposure to Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate can occur through dermal contact, inhalation, and ingestion.

 





Share !






 

















E-NEWSLETTER
















SHORTCUTS

PRODUCTS
NEWS
CORPORATE
HUMAN RESOURCES
BLOG
CATALOG REQUEST



CONTACT

CONTACT US
SUGGESTION AND COMPLAINT
SUPPORT
KVKK POLİTİKASI




SOCIAL NETWORKS

FACEBOOK TWITTER INSTAGRAM YOUTUBE 







                2020 © All rights reserved by ATAMAN KİMYA. No content and images can be used for permission.            











1980 yılında Cengiz Tuncel, Şelale Kimya' yı devralmış ve 2006 yılında hammadde ithalatı ve ihracatı amacıyla ATAMAN Kimya Ltd' yi kurmuştur. Ataman Kimya 2009 yılında Cengiz Tuncel tarafından bir sonraki nesile devredilmiştir ve 2020 yılında ATAMAN Kimya A.Ş adını almıştır.













