Document Name: role of Abil 100 in Barrier Cream3
Document link: https://www.ulprospector.com/en/na/PersonalCare/Detail/1483/107047/Energizing-Cream-Gel-Formulation-H-13-09-1




Energizing Cream Gel (Formulation #H 13/09-1) by Evonik – Personal Care - Personal Care & Cosmetics












































Login


Register


English 



                              English
                            



                              Français
                            



                              Deutsch
                            



                              Español
                            



                              Português
                            



                              简体中文
                            



                              繁體中文
                            



                              日本語
                            




North America 



                              Asia Pacific
                            



                              Europe (EMEA)
                            



                              Latin America
                            



                              North America
                            














Search



Region

User













Search







Samples (0)












Home


Personal Care & Cosmetics


Energizing Cream Gel (Formulation #H 13/09-1)
        



    Energizing Cream Gel (Formulation #H 13/09-1)
    


Company:
Evonik – Personal Care




Documents



Energizing Cream Gel (Formulation #H 13/09-1)




In this Formulation


 (Request a sample)Send your request now - TEGO® Cosmo C 100
 (Request a sample)Send your request now - TEGOSOFT® CR MB




Evonik – Personal Care makes their documentation available in the regions indicated below:










Energizing Cream Gel (Formulation #H 13/09-1) utilizes the products ABIL® 350, ABIL® EM 97 S, TEGO® Carbomer 341 ER, TEGO® Cosmo C 100, TEGOSOFT® CR and TEGOSOFT® CT.


Company
Evonik is a sustainable specialties partner to companies who develop and market products for beauty and personal care. Customers leverage our broad portfolio of ingredients, technologies and services to generate superior sustainability and functionality outcomes that can enable and enhance their formulations. Evonik is a powerhouse and true global leader across a broad range of markets and applications: active ingredients, active delivery systems, skin care, sun care, color cosmetics, hair care and skin cleansing, alternative preservation and product stability. We place sustainability at the center of everything we do, from sourcing, production and innovative processes to capital expenditure and M&A decisions.
Company Documents

The Modern Art of Beauty
Actives Ingredients
Evonik Emulsifier Product Selection Guide - Solution Made Easy!
intoBeauty® - Our Interactive Online Tool for the Personal Care Industry
Product Protection Catalogue 2020




        The information presented here was acquired by UL from the producer of the product or material or original information provider.  However, UL assumes no responsibility or liability for the accuracy of the information contained on this website and strongly encourages that upon final product or material selection information is validated with the manufacturer.  This website provides links to other websites owned by third parties. The content of such third party sites is not within our control, and we cannot and will not take responsibility for the information or content.
    



Create Your Free Account

                    Request pricing or technical help
                

Share:











Categories
Attributes Categories

Form / Type ~ Creams
Form / Type ~ Gels

Formulations Categories

Skin / Body Care ~ Moisturizers / Barrier Therapeutics












×Close

ABOUT
Prospector Lists



                        Lists combine the ease of Bookmarks with the versatility of Tags. Instead of one collection of bookmarked items, create as many collections, called "Lists," as you need.
                    
Previous Bookmarks and Tags




                                Find the link to your List page in the user menu.
                            

                            All Tags have been converted to separate Lists, and your bookmarked items have been saved to a "Bookmarks" List.




Adding Items

                        When you click the Add to List button, a dropdown of your existing Lists appears. Click the List name to which you want to add this product or formula.
                    



Create a New List

                        You can also create a new List. Simply click "Create a New List" and enter a name.
                    



Multiple Lists

                        When you define a new List, the current item is automatically added to it. You can add a product or formula to as many Lists as you need.



Explore Your Lists

                        Easily see which Lists this item appears in, and quickly go to that List from the links that appear on the page.



 Back







Next 
Done 


















 About
          

About
Prospector
Contact Us
Advertising Programs
Datasheet Services
Knowledge Center

Data Subject Access Request Portal





 Formulating Materials & Ingredients
          

Formulating Materials & Ingredients
Adhesives & Sealants
Food, Beverage & Nutrition
Graphic Arts & Inks
Household, Industrial & Institutional Cleaners
Lubricant & Metalworking Fluids
Paint & Coatings
Personal Care & Cosmetics




 Solid Materials
          

Solid Materials

Metals
Plastics
Plastics Additives





            UL is a global independent safety science company offering expertise in certification, validation, testing, inspections, auditing, education and advisory services. Our breadth, established objectivity and proven history mean we are a symbol of trust and enable us to help provide peace of mind to all.
          

Learn More





          UL and the UL logo are trademarks of UL LLC ©2023 All Rights Reserved.

          
Terms & Conditions
Privacy Policy
Data Policy









×


We're sorry, but the industry you have selected is not currently available in your chosen language. You may choose a language below to continue to this industry or close this dialog above.

English
Simplified Chinese









GDPR Notice:
Close














  









