Document Name: role of Glycerin/Glycerin in Anti Ozone Cream4
Document link: https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/10/211004104229.htm






Glycerin is safe, effective in psoriasis model -- ScienceDaily




























Your source for the latest research news





Follow:
Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
Subscribe:
RSS Feeds






advertisement














Science News
from research organizations




1
2

Glycerin is safe, effective in psoriasis model

Date:
October 4, 2021
Source:
Medical College of Georgia at Augusta University
Summary:
Patients with psoriasis have reported that glycerin, an inexpensive, harmless, slightly sweet liquid high on the list of ingredients in many skin lotions, is effective at combating their psoriasis and now scientists have objective evidence to support their reports.

Share:



Facebook
Twitter
Pinterest
LinkedIN
Email






advertisement









FULL STORY




Patients with psoriasis have reported that glycerin, an inexpensive, harmless, slightly sweet liquid high on the list of ingredients in many skin lotions, is effective at combatting their psoriasis and now scientists have objective evidence to support their reports.

They found that whether applied topically or ingested in drinking water, glycerin, or glycerol, helps calm the classic scaly, red, raised and itchy patches in their psoriasis model, Dr. Wendy Bollag, cell physiologist and skin researcher at the Medical College of Georgia and Charlie Norwood VA Medical Center and her colleagues report in the International Journal of Molecular Sciences.
The studies also provide more evidence of the different ways glycerin enables the healthy maturation of skin cells through four stages that result in a smooth, protective skin layer. Psoriasis is an immune-mediated problem that typically surfaces in young adults in which skin cells instead multiply rapidly, piling up into inflamed patches.
"We have experimental data now to show what these patients with psoriasis are reporting," says Bollag, who nearly 20 years ago first reported in The Journal of Investigative Dermatology that glycerin, a natural alcohol and water attractor known to help the skin look better, also safely helped it function better by helping skin cells mature properly.
Bollag's early report led to many anecdotal reports from individuals and their reports ultimately led to the newly published study.
Topically, glycerin is known to have a soothing, emollient effect. But another key part of its magic, which Dr. Bollag has helped delineate, is its conversion to the lipid, or fat, phosphatidylglycerol, which ultimately regulates the function of keratinocytes, our major skin cell type, and suppresses inflammation in the skin.

Glycerin gets into the skin through avenues like aquaporin-3, a channel expressed in skin cells, and the MCG scientists have shown that once inside, aquaporin 3 funnels glycerin to phospholipase-D-2, an enzyme that converts fats in the external cell membrane into cell signals, ultimately converting glycerin to phosphatidylglycerol.
In 2018, Bollag and team reported that topical application of phosphatidylglycerol reduced inflammation and the characteristic raised skin patches in a mouse model of psoriasis. This time they decided to look at the impact of its widely available precursor glycerin.
For the new studies, they used imiquimod, which is known to produce psoriasis-like plaques on humans using it for problems like genital warts and some skin cancers, to produce an animal model. The mice either drank the sweet natural alcohol or the scientists applied it topically. Either way, glycerin helped reduce development of the characteristic skin lesions, the scientists report, a finding which helps underline that glycerin works in more than one way to improve the skin condition.
Externally, glycerin showed its action as an emollient because even in mice missing phospholipase-D-2, it was beneficial. Additionally, topically it appears to compete with hydrogen peroxide for space inside the aquaporin 3 channel. Hydrogen peroxide is commonly known as a mild antiseptic but we produce it as well and at low levels it's a cell signaling molecule. But at high levels, hydrogen peroxide produces destructive oxidative stress, which can actually cause psoriasis.
The scientists found that topical glycerin reduced the levels of hydrogen peroxide entering skin cells. When they added glycerin and hydrogen peroxide at the same time directly to skin cells, they found that glycerin protected against the oxidative stress from hydrogen peroxide.

"Glycerol is basically outcompeting the hydrogen peroxide in getting in there and preventing it from being able to enter and increase oxidative stress," Bollag says. Oil and water don't mix, so yet another way glycerin may be helpful is by supporting the skin's major role as a water permeability barrier so that, as an extreme, when we sit in a bathtub the bath water doesn't pass through our skin so we blow up like a balloon, she says.
On the other hand, when glycerin was ingested by the mice missing the phospholipase- D-2, which converts fats or lipids in a cell's membrane to signals, it simply did not work, Bollag says, which confirmed their earlier findings that internally anyway, glycerin pairs with the enzyme to produce the signal essential to skin cell maturation.
Some of their other most recent work is detailing more about how phosphatidylglycerol decreases inflammation.
Bollag would like next steps to also include clinical trials with dermatologists and patients and is working to find a formulation scientist who can make what she thinks will be the optimal combination: glycerin and phosphatidylglycerol in the same topical cream.
The addition of phosphatidylglyerol itself, rather than just the glycerin that makes it, is essentially a backup since there is some evidence that in psoriasis the essential conversion of glycerin to phosphatidylglycerol is not optimal. Bollag's lab and others have shown reduced levels of aquaporin 3 in psoriasis, which likely means less phosphatidylgycerol, so making more glycerin available may help, albeit not as efficiently, raise the availability of this lipid essential to normal skin cell proliferation.
Moving quickly into clinical trials should be comparatively easy since, as with glycerin, there already is experience with the use of phosphatidylglycerol in humans. For example, it's a component of some high-end cosmetics, Bollag says.
She suspects that this sort of two-punch combination, could help keep early signs of psoriasis at bay and, with more advanced disease, use existing psoriasis treatments to get the skin condition under control then start applying glycerin to help keep it that way.
Bollag and her colleagues reported in 2018 in the Journal of Investigative Dermatology that in a mouse model of psoriasis, phosphtidylglycerol reduced inflammation and the characteristic raised skin lesions of psoriasis.
While its exact cause is unclear, psoriasis is an immune-mediated condition and patients have higher levels of inflammation, as well as too many skin cells being produced then maturing abnormally. The heightened inflammation also puts them at increased risk for problems like heart disease.
Biologics used to treat psoriasis work different ways to stem this overactive immune response but in addition to their high cost, can put the patient at risk for problems like serious infections and cancer. The only side effect she has seen in about 20 years of working with glycerin and the clinical and cosmetic use already out there, is it can leave the skin feeling slightly sticky.
Our bodies can make glycerol from the carbohydrates, proteins and fats that we eat or already have in our body.
The research was funded in part by the Veterans Administration.










RELATED TOPICS


Health & Medicine


Psoriasis


Skin Care


Diseases and Conditions


Skin Cancer


Cosmetic Surgery


Cosmetics


Immune System


Healthy Aging








RELATED TERMS


Psoriasis


Malignant melanoma


Acupuncture


Boiling


Delusions of parasite infestation


Vitamin E


Plum


Peach














advertisement







 Story Source:
Materials provided by Medical College of Georgia at Augusta University. Original written by Toni Baker. Note: Content may be edited for style and length.




Journal Reference:

Vivek Choudhary, Ismail Kaddour-Djebbar, Victoria E. Custer, Rawipan Uaratanawong, Xunsheng Chen, Elyssa Cohen, Rong Yang, Etsubdenk Ajebo, Sarah Hossack, Wendy B. Bollag. Glycerol Improves Skin Lesion Development in the Imiquimod Mouse Model of Psoriasis: Experimental Confirmation of Anecdotal Reports from Patients with Psoriasis. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 2021; 22 (16): 8749 DOI: 10.3390/ijms22168749







Cite This Page:


MLA
APA
Chicago


Medical College of Georgia at Augusta University. "Glycerin is safe, effective in psoriasis model." ScienceDaily. ScienceDaily, 4 October 2021. <www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/10/211004104229.htm>.
Medical College of Georgia at Augusta University. (2021, October 4). Glycerin is safe, effective in psoriasis model. ScienceDaily. Retrieved April 27, 2023 from www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/10/211004104229.htm
Medical College of Georgia at Augusta University. "Glycerin is safe, effective in psoriasis model." ScienceDaily. www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2021/10/211004104229.htm (accessed April 27, 2023).












   Print
   Email
   Share




1
2
3
4
5


Breaking
this hour




Direct Image of Black Hole Expelling a ...
Astronomers Solve 60-Year Mystery of Quasars
Black Holes Eating Stars Like Messy Toddlers
Human-Like Intelligence in Nanowire Networks
Jellyfish-Like Robots to Clean Up Oceans
Crinkles in Spacetime
Harm from Record-Breaking Heatwaves: Locations
3,000 Year Old Bone Found in Alaskan Cave
Small Acts of Kindness, Frequent and Universal
Early-Universe Prequel to Huge Galaxy Cluster


Trending Topics
this week



HEALTH & MEDICINE


Teen Health
Fitness
Lung Cancer

MIND & BRAIN


Memory
Alcoholism
Depression

LIVING & WELL


Teen Health
Fitness
Stress



advertisement








Strange & Offbeat
 



HEALTH & MEDICINE


Cannabinoids Give Worms the Munchies, Too
Chitin from Consuming Insects Can Help Both Gut Microbiota and Global Health
Now You Can Be Comfortable in Your E-Skin

MIND & BRAIN


Brain Circuits for Locomotion Evolved Long Before Appendages and Skeletons
Nanowire Networks Learn and Remember Like a Human Brain
Can You Describe a Sensation Without Feeling It First?

LIVING & WELL


Vocal Tract Size, Shape Dictate Speech Sounds
Virtual Reality Games Can Be Used as a Tool in Personnel Assessment
Edible Electronics: How a Seaweed Second Skin Could Transform Health and Fitness Sensor Tech








Explore More
from ScienceDaily



RELATED STORIES

 Suffering from Psoriasis? Blame This Trio of Proteins

Nov. 19, 2021 — About 7.5 million Americans suffer from psoriasis, an autoimmune disease that shows up as patches of red, inflamed skin and painful, scaly rashes. Although there are effective treatments for ...  Getting Under the Skin of Psoriasis

July 22, 2020 — Psoriasis afflicts millions of people worldwide, but treatments are limited to small molecules like steroids, which can cause skin thinning and lose their effectiveness over time. Medical researchers ...  Why Beta-Blockers Cause Skin Inflammation

Nov. 7, 2019 — Beta-blockers are often used to treat high blood pressure and other cardiovascular diseases. However, in some patients they can trigger or exacerbate psoriasis, an inflammatory skin disease. ...  Innovative Candidate Drug Against Malaria

Sep. 18, 2019 — A molecule once designed to cure the skin disease psoriasis appears to be particularly effective against malaria. The antimalarial properties were revealed thanks to one researcher's inspired hunch ... 






advertisement












 






Toggle navigation
Menu  

SD


SD

Home Page


Top Science News


Latest News







Home 

Home Page


Top Science News


Latest News





Health 



View all the latest top news in the health sciences, or browse the topics below:


Health & Medicine

Allergy
Cancer
Cold and Flu
Diabetes
Heart Disease
... more topics





Mind & Brain

ADD and ADHD
Alzheimer's
Headaches
Intelligence
Psychology
... more topics





Living Well

Parenting
Child Development
Stress
Nutrition
Fitness
... more topics















Tech 



View all the latest top news in the physical sciences & technology, or browse the topics below:


Matter & Energy

Chemistry
Fossil Fuels
Nanotechnology
Physics
Solar Energy
... more topics





Space & Time

Black Holes
Dark Matter
Extrasolar Planets
Solar System
Space Telescopes
... more topics





Computers & Math

Artificial Intelligence
Mathematics
Quantum Computers
Robotics
Virtual Reality
... more topics















Enviro 



View all the latest top news in the environmental sciences, or browse the topics below:


Plants & Animals

Agriculture and Food
Biology
Biotechnology
Extinction
Microbes and More
... more topics





Earth & Climate

Climate
Earthquakes
Geology
Global Warming
Pollution
... more topics





Fossils & Ruins

Anthropology
Archaeology
Dinosaurs
Evolution
Paleontology
... more topics















Society 



View all the latest top news in the social sciences & education, or browse the topics below:


Science & Society

Arts & Culture
Economics
Privacy Issues
Public Health
Sports
... more topics





Business & Industry

Computers & Internet
Energy & Resources
Engineering
Medical Technology
Transportation
... more topics





Education & Learning

Creativity
Educational Psychology
Infant & Preschool
Learning Disorders
STEM Education
... more topics















Quirky 

Top News


Human Quirks
Odd Creatures
Bizarre Things
Weird World








Keyword:Search














Free Subscriptions

Get the latest science news in your RSS reader with ScienceDaily's hourly updated newsfeeds, covering hundreds of topics:


 List of All RSS Feeds




Follow Us

Keep up to date with the latest news from ScienceDaily via social networks:


 Facebook


 Twitter


 LinkedIn




Have Feedback?

Tell us what you think of ScienceDaily -- we welcome both positive and negative comments. Have any problems using the site? Questions?


 Leave Feedback


 Contact Us







About This Site   |   Staff   |   Reviews   |   Contribute   |   Advertise   |   Privacy Policy   |  Editorial Policy  |   Terms of Use


Copyright 1995-2022 ScienceDaily or by other parties, where indicated. All rights controlled by their respective owners.
Content on this website is for information only. It is not intended to provide medical or other professional advice.
Views expressed here do not necessarily reflect those of ScienceDaily, its staff, its contributors, or its partners.
Financial support for ScienceDaily comes from advertisements and referral programs, where indicated.
— CCPA/CPRA: Do Not Sell or Share My Information — GDPR: Manage My Privacy Settings —





