Document Name: role of 1,3 Butylene Glycol/Humectant in Barrier Cream2
Document link: https://www.psmarketresearch.com/market-analysis/1-3-bg-market






1,3-Butylene Glycol Market Growth Forecast Report, 2030











































Home








Report Store






Report Store




Consumer Products



Life Sciences



ICT and Media



Semiconductor and Electronics



Chemicals and Materials 



Automotive and Transportation



Power and Energy
 


Back




Services


Knowledge Center






Knowledge Center




Press Journals



Blogs




Back




About Us


Contact Us






































1,3-Butylene Glycol Market
  Published:   February 2022   |  Report Code:  11196  |  Available Format: PDF  |  Pages:  363




Get Free Sample Pages


Make an Inquiry








Home
Chemicals and Materials 
1,3-Butylene Glycol Market








1,3-Butylene Glycol Market Research Report: By Product (Pharmaceutical Grade, Industrial Grade), Function (Humectant, Emollient, Stabilizer, Intermediate), Application (Cosmetic & Personal Care Products, Food Products) – Global Industry Size and Demand Forecast to 2030













Published:
February 2022


Report Code:
11196 

Available Format:
PDF 

Pages:
363 









Report Description 

Table of Contents 

Market Segmentation 

 Request Free Sample Pages 



Market Overview
1,3-butylene glycol market generated an estimated $161.3 million revenue in 2021, and the market size will advance at a CAGR of over 5.9% during 2021–2030, primarily due to the increasing demand for this chemical from the cosmetics industry.
Apart from this, the demand for the material is booming in the food, pharmaceutical, paints & coatings, inks, and plasticizer industries. Essentially, the growth in the demand for pharmaceutical-grade of this chemical from these industries is driving the market growth.

As a result of the slowdown in manufacturing activities in 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the demand for 1,3-butylene glycol dropped. Furthermore, countries with a higher dependence on the import of 1,3-butylene glycol were impacted, as the global demand is met by APAC countries, such as China and Japan, which were likely to increase the price of the chemical in order to mitigate losses. Moreover, the rise in logistics costs also resulted in an increase in the price of 1,3-butylene glycol. However, the market is expected to recover with the expected increase in the demand for cosmetics & personal care products, as people’s disposable income is gradually growing.

1,3-Butylene Glycol Market Report Coverage



Report Attribute
Details





Historical Years


2017-2021




Forecast Years


2022-2030




Base Year (2021) Market Size


$161.3 Million (Estimated)




Market Size Forecast in 2030


$269.1 Million




Forecast Period CAGR


5.9%




Report Coverage


Market Trends, Drivers, and Restraints; Revenue Estimation and Forecast; Segmentation Analysis; Country Breakdown; Impact of COVID-19; Companies’ Strategic Developments; Market Share Analysis of Key Players; Company Profiling




Market Size by Segments


By Product; By Function; By Application; By Region




Market Size of Geographies


U.S.; Canada; Germany; France; U.K.; Italy; Spain; Japan; China; India; South Korea; Brazil; Mexico; Saudi Arabia; South Africa; U.A.E.





Pharmaceutical-Grade 1,3-Butylene Glycol Witnesses Higher Consumption
The pharmaceutical grade of the chemical is used more, based on product. This is because pharmaceutical-grade 1,3-butylene glycol is a popular chemical solvent in cosmetics, pharmaceutical, and food production. The chemical finds application in pharmaceuticals due to its antibacterial properties. When compared to similar organic compounds, such as glycerol, propylene glycol, and sorbitol, 1,3-butylene glycol is a more-effective antimicrobial agent, helping in the inhibition and removal of yeast, mold, and gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria Therefore, the high demand for the base chemical from the cosmetics & personal care, food, and pharmaceutical industries leads to the higher consumption of its pharmaceutical grade.
Hot Revenue Pocket

The market outlook for this market is rather promising, as its production volume and demand are expected to grow in the coming decade. The existing production capacity may have to increase significantly, which brings opportunities for investors who want to invest in manufacturing platforms to gain scale in certain geographies. This will ultimately increase the sale of 1,3-butylene glycol as it is one of the most-important ingredients in the cosmetics industry.
Moreover, due to the large population of countries such as India and China, they are expected to emerge as major healthcare and cosmetics markets in the coming years. As a result, companies in the pharmaceutical industry are investing heavily in these nations, which is expected to result in the growth of the 1,3-butylene glycol market. The pharmaceutical grade accounted for over 80% share in terms of both volume and value in the APAC market in 2021, driven by the increasing number of cosmetic product approvals, high investments in research and development, and rising per capita income.


Usage of Chemical as Emollient To Witness Fastest Growth
The usage of the chemical is expected to rise the fastest as an emollient, based on function. Emollients are frequently used to treat dry, itchy, and scaly skin caused by conditions such as eczema, psoriasis, and ichthyosis. They also coat the skin with a thin oily film that seals in the moisture. Moreover, aid in the prevention of inflammatory patches and flare-ups of these conditions.
Cosmetics & Personal Care Products Are Largest Application Area of 1,3-Butylene Glycol
The chemical finds the widest application in the cosmetics & personal care products industry. Here, it is used as a humectant, masking agent, skin conditioning agent, viscosity controller, and solvent. It forms a barrier to prevent the drying out of or loss of moisture from these products. The chemical also helps in preventing the crystallization of the insoluble components, which makes it a preferred compound for cosmetic and personal care applications.
Driven by Large Consumer Base, APAC Generates Highest Revenue from 1,3 Butylene Glycol Sale
Globally, the APAC region dominates the 1,3-butylene glycol market, and it is expected to remain the largest consumer of the material in the future as well. The tremendous demand for this chemical in the emerging economies of the region is expected to propel the global market. The growing demand for cosmetic & personal care products, such as body moisturizing lotions, sunscreen lotions and creams, face washes, hair styling gels, and makeup for men and women, fuels the APAC market's expansion, which is encouraging players to take steps to leverage this demand.
For Instance, in October 2019, Daicel Corporation expanded its distribution agreement with Genomatica Inc. by entering into an exclusive sales agreement to promote and sell the latter’s Brontide natural 1,3-butylene glycol in the APAC region. The success of the initial partnership, combined with Genomatica’s large-scale commercial production of Brontide since January 2019, encouraged both companies to expand their relationship to an exclusive sales agreement.
To Widen Their Customer Base Market Producers Involving in Partnerships and Facility Expansions
1,3-butylene glycol market players are announcing partnerships in order to expand their product portfolio and advance their technology. For Instance,

In May 2020, Genomatica Inc. and Glenn LLC, an Azelis Americas subsidiary, jointly announced Glenn LLC as the exclusive distributor of Genomatica’s Brontide natural butylene glycol in the U.S.
In June 2019, Daicel Corporation announced the construction of a new production facility for 1,3-butylene glycol at its Aboshi plant in Japan. The new facility was completed in September 2020 and the shipping of the products commenced in October 2020.
In November 2018, Genomatica Inc. announced a distribution partnership with Viachem Ltd., a U.S.-based specialty chemical and ingredient distributor. The partnership enabled Viachem Ltd. to market, sell, and distribute Genomatica’s natural Brontide butylene glycol in the personal care market of North America.

Key Players in 1,3-Butylene Glycol Market Are:

Daicel Corporation
KH Neochem Co. Ltd.
Genomatica Inc.
Godavari Biorefineries Ltd.
OQ Chemicals GmbH
Haihang Industry Co. Ltd.

Market Size Breakdown by Segments
The 1,3-butylene glycol market report offers comprehensive market segmentation analysis along with market estimation for the period 2017–2030.
Based on Product

Pharmaceutical Grade
Industrial Grade

Based on Function

Humectant
Emollient
Stabilizer
Intermediate  

Based on Application

Cosmetic & Personal Care Products
Food Products

Geographical Analysis 

North America

U.S.
Canada


Europe

Germany
France
U.K.
Spain
Italy


Asia-Pacific

 Japan
China
India
South Korea


Latin America

 Brazil
Mexico


Middle East and Africa

Saudi Arabia
U.A.E.
South Africa





Frequently Asked Questions About This Report

What will be the 1,3-butylene glycol market CAGR by value?+

During 2021–2030, the market for 1,3-butylene glycol will witness a 5.9% value CAGR.

Which grade witnesses the higher sale in the 1,3-butylene glycol industry?+

The 1,3-butylene glycol industry witnesses the higher sale of the pharmaceutical grade of the chemical.

Which are the largest and fastest-growing regions in the 1,3-butylene glycol market?+

APAC is the largest and fastest-growing market for 1,3-butylene glycol.

What are the key 1,3-butylene glycol industry growth drivers?+

The key drivers for the 1,3-butylene glycol industry are the booming cosmetics sector and the rising demand for the chemical in the pharmaceutical industry.

Which strategic measure characterizes the 1,3-butylene glycol market competitive landscape?+

The market for 1,3-butylene glycol is characterized by a high number of partnerships.













Place An Order



Single User License


 The report will be delivered in PDF format without printing rights. It is recommended for a single user.

USD 4900


Group License


 The report will be delivered in PDF format along with the printing rights. It is recommended for up to five users.

USD 6400


Enterprise License


 The report will be delivered in PDF format along with printing rights and detailed Excel sheet. It is recommended for organizations where multiple people would like to access the report from multiple locations. 

USD 8400


 BUY NOW 








INQUIRE BEFORE PURCHASE












Connect with our sales team







International:+1-347-960-6455








US/Canada Toll Free:+1-888-778-7886







[email protected]






Customized Report Solution

Get a bespoke market intelligence solution

Buy report sections that meet your requirements
Get the report customized as per your needs


Request Customized Report






Share this report
































Want a report tailored exactly to your business strategy?
Request Customization


Want an insight-rich discussion with the report author?
Speak to Analyst



 


We are committed to ensuring the highest level of client satisfaction



Quality Acknowledgement
Our dedication to providing the most-accurate market information has earned us verification by Dun & Bradstreet (D&B). We strive for quality checking of the highest level to enable data-driven decision making for you



Unmatched Standards
Our insights into the minutest levels of the markets, including the latest trends and competitive landscape, give you all the answers you need to take your business to new heights



Reach Us Whenever You Need
With 24/7 research support, we ensure that the wheels of your business never stop turning. Don’t let time stand in your way. Get all your queries answered with a simple phone call or email, as and when required



Complete Data Security
We take a cautious approach to protecting your personal and confidential information. Trust is the strongest bond that connects us and our clients, and trust we build by complying with all international and domestic data protection and privacy laws







Make An Enquiry
Request Free Sample Pages


﻿







Connect with us





































Quick Links














Research Methodology







Career







Media Citations







FAQs






Find Help














How to Order







Privacy Policy







Terms & Conditions







Sitemap







24/7 Customer Support














International: +1-347-960-6455







US/Canada Toll Free: +1-888-778-7886







India: +91-120-454-1337







For business enquiries - [email protected]







For career enquiries - [email protected]






















©2023 P&S Intelligence. All Rights Reserved.







We use cookies to enhance your experience. By continuing to use this site you consent to our use of cookies. Privacy Policy
X















