Document Name: role of Triethanolamine in Protective Cream3
Document link: https://www.muller-pharma.com/eshop/ochranne-kremy-na-ruce/


























Protective hand creams 







CZ
SK
EN






Products/Contact
 







Protective hand creams



The skin has protective mechanisms but over the long term (e.g. due to frequent washing), its protective function weakens. The symptoms of damaged skin are red and inflamed skin, excess drying, painful tiny cracks or itching of the skin. Therefore, careful washing with the right washing products is of the absolute necessity. Of equal importance, though, is the use of special creams on the skin after washing. Primalona® product line is a hand protection at work in all branches of industry and services.






Primalona® Soothing Hand Cream with Camomile




Calming cream with camomile extract is convenient for regular treatment of the dry skin after work with detergents. A protective for work in all industries and services.




Ingredients: Aqua, Paraffinum Liquidum, Glyceryl Stearate, Ceteareth-20, Ceteareth-12, Cetearyl Alcohol, Cetyl Palmitate, Phenoxyethanol, Ethylhexylglycerin, Chamomilla Recutita Flower Extract, PEG-40 Hydrogenated Castor Oil, Carbomer, Triethanolamine, Parfum.



 



100 ml























Primalona® Regenerative Hand Cream with Marigold




Regenerative hand cream with marigold extract is convenient for regular treatment of the dry skin after frequent use of soap. A protective for work in all industries and services.




Ingredients: Aqua, Paraffinum Liquidum, Glyceryl Stearate, Ethylhexyl Stearate, Cetearyl Alcohol, Ceteareth-20, Ceteareth-12, Cetyl Palmitate, Alcohol denat., Calendula Officinalis Flower Extract, Carbomer, Triethanolamine, Tocopheryl Acetate, Panthenol, Phenoxyethanol, Ethylhexylglycerin, Parfum, Citronellol, Alpha-Isomethyl Ionone, Linalool.



 



100 ml























Primalona® Glycerin Hand Cream with Aloe Vera




Regenerative cream with Aloe Vera and glycerin which hydrates the dry skin after work with detergents. A protective for work in all industries and services.




Ingredients: Aqua, Paraffinum Liquidum, Glycerin, Glyceryl Stearate, Cetearyl Alcohol, Ceteareth-20, Ceteareth-12, Cetyl Palmitate, Tocopheryl Acetate, Aloe Barbadensis Leaf Juice Powder, Phenoxyethanol, Ethylhexylglycerin, Carbomer, Triethanolamine, Parfum, Limonene, Linalool.



 



100 ml


























Dr. Müller Pharma, a prominent Czech producer of drugs, medical devices, cosmetics and food supplementsDr. Müller Pharma s.r.o., zapsaná v OR, vedeného KS v Hradci Králové, oddíl C, vložka 7932,  IČO: 632 18 976  
      Powered by Digimadi    Webmaster     
      © 2013 All rights reserved | 
      Personal data protection | 
        |
      Otevřít nastavení cookies







EUROPEAN UNION European Regional Development Fund Operational Programme Enterprise and Innovations for Competitiveness











