Document Name: role of Beeswax (white, bleached) in Cover Cream2
Document link: https://www.rxlist.com/beeswax/supplements.htm

























Beeswax: Health Benefits, Side Effects, Uses, Dose & Precautions


















 



 














































Drugs & Vitamins
Drugs A-Z
Generic Drugs A-Z
Drugs by Classification
Drugs Comparison (Drug Vs. Drug)
Vitamins & Supplements
Drug Interaction Checker
Pill Identifier


Tools & Resources
Diseases & Conditions
Medical Dictionary

Media

Slideshows
Images
Quizzes












Beeswax
Reviewed on 6/11/2021



vitamins, herbs, dietary supplements a-z listbeeswax
                






Other Name(s):Apic cerana, Apis Mel, Apis mellifera, Apis Mellifica, Bees Wax, Bleached Beeswax, Cera Alba, Cera de Abejas, Cera Flava, Cire d&rsquo;Abeille, Cire d&rsquo;Abeille Blanche, Cire d&rsquo;Abeille Blanchie, Cire d&rsquo;Abeille Jaune, Cire Blanche, Cire Jaune, White Beeswax, White Wax, Yellow Beeswax, Yellow Wax. 



Overview
Uses
Side Effects
Precautions
Dosing


Overview

Beeswax is a product made from the honeycomb of the honeybee and other bees. Bees consume about eight times as much honey and fly 150,000 miles to create one pound of beeswax. The mixing of pollen oils into honeycomb wax turns the white wax into a yellow or brown color. Beeswax is generally available as yellow, white, or bleached. Yellow beeswax comes directly from the honeycomb, while white and bleached beeswax come from yellow beeswax. Man-made versions of beeswax have been manufactured to look like natural beeswax.

As medicine, beeswax is used for lowering cholesterol and for relieving pain. It is also used for swelling (inflammation), ulcers, diarrhea, and hiccups.

In foods and beverages, white beeswax and beeswax absolute (yellow beeswax treated with alcohol), are used as stiffening agents.

In manufacturing, yellow and white beeswax are used as thickeners, emulsifiers, and as stiffening agents in cosmetics. Beeswax absolute is used as a fragrance in soaps and perfumes. White beeswax and beeswax absolute are also used to polish pills.How does it work?
Beeswax has mild anti-swelling (anti-inflammatory) effects. There is also some evidence that it might help protect the stomach.






QUESTION
Next to red peppers, you can get the most vitamin C from ________________.
See Answer







Uses & Effectiveness

Insufficient Evidence to Rate Effectiveness for...

Small tears in the anus (anal fissures). Early research suggests that applying a mixture of beeswax, honey, and olive oil to the affected area for 12 hours reduces pain, bleeding, and itching due to anal fissures.
Diaper rash. Early research suggests that applying a mixture of beeswax, honey, and olive oil to the affected area four times daily for 7 days reduces symptoms of diaper rash. 
Hemorrhoids. Early research suggests that applying a mixture of beeswax, honey, and olive oil to the affected area for 12 hours reduces pain, bleeding, and itching due to hemorrhoids.
Ringworm (tinea corporis). Early research suggests that applying a mixture of beeswax, honey, and olive oil to the affected area three times daily for 4 weeks improves ringworm.
Jock itch (tinea cruris). Early research suggests that applying a mixture of beeswax, honey, and olive oil to the affected area three times daily for 4 weeks improves jock itch.
Fungal skin infection (tinea versicolor). Early research suggests that applying a mixture of beeswax, honey, and olive oil to the affected area three times daily for 4 weeks improves a fungal skin infection called tinea versicolor.
High cholesterol.
Pain.
Ulcers.
Diarrhea.
Hiccups.
Other conditions.
More evidence is needed to rate the effectiveness of beeswax for these uses.
Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database rates effectiveness based on scientific evidence according to the following scale: Effective, Likely Effective, Possibly Effective, Possibly Ineffective, Likely Ineffective, and Insufficient Evidence to Rate (detailed description of each of the ratings).







Side Effects

Beeswax is LIKELY SAFE for most people when taken by mouth as food or as a medicine, or when applied directly to the skin.







SLIDESHOW
Vitamin D Deficiency: How Much Vitamin D Is Enough?
See Slideshow






Special Precautions & Warnings

Pregnancy and breast-feeding: There is not enough reliable information about the safety of taking beeswax if you are pregnant or breast-feeding. Stay on the safe side and avoid use.







Dosing

The appropriate dose of beeswax depends on several factors such as the user's age, health, and several other conditions. At this time there is not enough scientific information to determine an appropriate range of doses for beeswax.  Keep in mind that natural products are not always necessarily safe and dosages can be important.  Be sure to follow relevant directions on product labels and consult your pharmacist or physician or other healthcare professional before using.






Report Problems to the Food and Drug Administration
You are encouraged to report negative side effects of prescription drugs to the FDA. Visit the FDA MedWatch website or call 1-800-FDA-1088.


Health Solutions From Our Sponsors


Penis Curved When Erect
Could I have CAD?
Treat Bent Fingers
Treat HR+, HER2- MBC
Tired of Dandruff?
Life with Cancer




References

	Al-Waili, N. S. An alternative treatment for pityriasis versicolor, tinea cruris, tinea corporis and tinea faciei with topical application of honey, olive oil and beeswax mixture: an open pilot study. Complement Ther Med 2004;12(1):45-47. View abstract.	Al-Waili, N. S. Clinical and mycological benefits of topical application of honey, olive oil and beeswax in diaper dermatitis. Clin Microbiol.Infect. 2005;11(2):160-163. View abstract.	Al-Waili, N. S. Mixture of honey, beeswax and olive oil inhibits growth of Staphylococcus aureus and Candida albicans. Arch Med Res 2005;36(1):10-13. View abstract.	Al-Waili, N. S. Topical application of natural honey, beeswax and olive oil mixture for atopic dermatitis or psoriasis: partially controlled, single-blinded study. Complement Ther Med 2003;11(4):226-234. View abstract.	Fruijtier-Polloth, C. Safety assessment on polyethylene glycols (PEGs) and their derivatives as used in cosmetic products. Toxicology 10-15-2005;214(1-2):1-38. View abstract.	Hallgren, R. [Contraception--with us and others]. Jordemodern. 1986;99(1-2):4-10. View abstract.	Hargrove, J. L., Greenspan, P., and Hartle, D. K. Nutritional significance and metabolism of very long chain fatty alcohols and acids from dietary waxes. Exp.Biol Med (Maywood.) 2004;229(3):215-226. View abstract.	Illnait, J., Terry, H., Mas, R., Fernandez, L., and Carbajal, D. Effects of D-002, a product isolated from beeswax, on gastric symptoms of patients with osteoarthritis treated with piroxicam: a pilot study. J Med Food 2005;8(1):63-68. View abstract.	Jarvholm, B., Thiringer, G., and Axelson, O. Cancer morbidity among polishers. Br.J Ind.Med 1982;39(2):196-197. View abstract.	Lanigan, R. S. and Yamarik, T. A. Final report on the safety assessment of PEG-6, -8, and -20 sorbitan beeswax. Int.J.Toxicol. 2001;20 Suppl 4:27-38. View abstract.	Lubbe, J. and Sanchez-Politta, S. Propolis, beeswax, and the sensitization potential of topical calcineurin inhibitors. Clin Exp.Dermatol. 2006;31(1):147-148. View abstract.	Menendez, R., Amor, A. M., Rodeiro, I., Gonzalez, R. M., Gonzalez, P. C., Alfonso, J. L., and Mas, R. Policosanol modulates HMG-CoA reductase activity in cultured fibroblasts. Arch Med Res 2001;32(1):8-12. View abstract.	Menendez, R., Mas, R., Amor, A. M., Perez, Y., Gonzalez, R. M., Fernandez, J., Molina, V., and Jimenez, S. Antioxidant effects of D002 on the in vitro susceptibility of whole plasma in healthy volunteers. Arch Med Res 2001;32(5):436-441. View abstract.	Secor, R. M. The cervical cap. NAACOGS.Clin Issu.Perinat.Womens Health Nurs. 1992;3(2):236-245. View abstract.	Tchapla, A., Mejanelle, P., Bleton, J., and Goursaud, S. Characterisation of embalming materials of a mummy of the Ptolemaic era. Comparison with balms from mummies of different eras. J Sep.Sci 2004;27(3):217-234. View abstract.Al-Waili, N. S., Saloom, K. S., Al-Waili, T. N., and Al-Waili, A. N. The safety and efficacy of a mixture of honey, olive oil, and beeswax for the management of hemorrhoids and anal fissure: a pilot study. ScientificWorldJournal 2006;6:1998-2005. View abstract.Carbajal D, Molina V, Valdes S, et al. Anti-inflammatory activity of D-002: an active product isolated from beeswax. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 1998;59:235-8. View abstract.Carbajal D, Molina V, Valdes S, et al. Anti-ulcer activity of higher primary alcohols of beeswax. J Pharm Pharmacol 1995;47:731-3. View abstract.Carbajal D, Molina V, Valdes S, et al. Possible cytoprotective mechanism in rats of D-002, an  anti-ulcerogenic product isolated from beeswax. J Pharm Pharmacol 1996;48:858-60. View abstract.Electronic Code of Federal Regulations. Title 21. Part 182 -- Substances Generally Recognized As Safe. Available at: https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm?CFRPart=182




 





Pill Identifier Tool Quick, Easy, Pill Identification




Drug Interaction Tool Check Potential Drug Interactions




Pharmacy Locator Tool Including 24 Hour, Pharmacies


















Health Solutions From Our Sponsors


Penis Curved When Erect
Could I have CAD?
Treat Bent Fingers
Treat HR+, HER2- MBC
Tired of Dandruff?
Life with Cancer
















Drug Categories

Drugs & Medications
Slideshows
Pill Identification Tool
Vitamins, Herbs, & Dietary Supplements
Images
Diseases
Symptom Checker
Dictionary
Quizzes



RxList

About Us
Consumer Contact RxList
Terms of Use
Privacy Policy
Sponsor Policy
Pharmaceutical Companies A-Z
Site Map










Do Not Sell My Personal Information
Copyright © 2023 by RxList Inc. An Internet Brands company. RxList does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.
















