Document Name: role of Squalane in Eye Cream4
Document link: https://www.doctoranne.de/biossance-squalane-marine-algae-eye-cream-exception-from-the-rule-doctors-review/







Biossance Squalane + Marine Algae Eye Cream - Exception from the rule? | Doctors Review

































































Skip to content


Skincare
Makeup
Lifestyle













Startseite
Discount codes
My shopping cart
About me
Work with me
Impressum/Disclaimer/Legal information














					Doctor Anne				

Skincare science and quick reviews

Skincare
Makeup
Lifestyle
 








				03 Okt 2022			

Skincare 
 Comment 

Biossance Squalane + Marine Algae Eye Cream – Exception from the rule? | Doctors Review 

ADVERTISEMENT INFO: PRODUCTS MENTIONED IN THIS POST ARE PR (GIFTED) AND LINKS USED ARE AFFILIATE LINKS. I RECEIVED NO MONEY TO WRITE THE BLOGPOST. PLEASE READ DISCLAIMER
 
No, you don’t really need a dedicated eye cream, I talked about that in length already. There obviously are exceptions to that “rule”, as there always are in skincare, and one if them is: I want a separate eye product or a product with a special texture. (More info: Are eye creams just a waste of money?)
 
Biossance Squalane + Marine Algae Eye Cream
 
So today let’s talk about the Biossance Squalane + Marine Algae Eye Cream, its texture, its ingredients and what it might possibly do for your under eyes.
 

 
What the Biossance Squalane + Marine Algae Eye Cream claims
Instantly lifts, firms & smooths the look of skin.
It has apparently also won three awards and has some clinical reports in which 33 women using it for 28 days rated improvement in wrinkles, firmness and lift around their eyes. There is also a before and after picture on the website that looks impressive – but we all know by now not to trust those, don’t we?
 
Facts about the Biossance Squalane + Marine Algae Eye Cream
Prize and size
One pot contains 15 ml and retails for 54 $ on the website here. It is vegan.
 
Texture and smell
The eye cream has a salmon color, is firm to the touch, but melts into the skin and has absolutely no scent. I mean, I sometimes get a whiff of, well, the scent of a cream, but only when I sniff very hard.
 
The color is a mix between orange and salmon
 
How to use the Biossance Squalane + Marine Algae Eye Cream
I am not sure if the salmon color is meant to counteract dark under eye circles, but if it is, it is way too subtle to have more than a barely noticeable brightening effect. Once smoothed on the skin, the color seems to disappear, at least on me. (More info: How to get rid of dark circles under the eyes)
Despite the initial firmness it is easy to spread and rich without being greasy. I usually prefer more lightweight textures during the day, but have used this without any problems under makeup as well.
 
Ingredients of the Biossance Squalane + Marine Algae Eye Cream
Water (Aqua) solv, Caprylic/Capric Triglyceride emo, Squalane  sii|emo 0 1, Glycerin  sii|h 0 0, Sorbitan Olivate  emu, Cetearyl Olivate  emu, Jojoba Esters so|emo|h, Glyceryl Stearate SE emu 2 3, Panthenol  so|h 0 0, Hydroxyethyl Acrylate/Sodium Acryloyldimethyl Taurate Copolymer vc, Cetyl Palmitate emo 0 0, Spilanthes Acmella Flower Extract, Palmitoyl Tripeptide-5  cci, Sorbitan Palmitate emu, Dunaliella Salina Extract, Astaxanthin  aox, Sodium Hyaluronate  sii|h 0 0, Phenoxyethanol pres, Ethylhexylglycerin pres, Tocopherol  aox 0–3 0–3, Citric Acid buff
Hover the mouse over an ingredient for short explanation. Read more on INCIDecoder.
Apart from the Squalane, which is used as emollient alongside quite a few others, and Glycerin, a well-known humectant, there is also Caprylic/ Capric Triglyceride, an emollient smoothing out the skin and Olivem 1000, made up of Sorbitan Olivate and Cetearyl Olivate, which is moisturizing, barrier repairing and soothing according to the manufacturer.
It also contains Panthenol, which is soothing, and Palmitoyl Tripeptide-5 claiming to boost collagen production. (More info: Everything you need to know about peptides in skincare)
The orangey color most likely comes from Astaxanthin, a pigment that also doubles up as antioxidant and often comes from algae – there is your explanation for the “Marine Algae” part of the name.
 
Does it live up to its claims?
In parts.
I don’t find it to firm and lift the skin, as I wouldn’t expect from topical skincare anyway, but it definitely smooths out the eye area due to ist rich texture. (More info: Can skincare cure acne? Limitations of topical products)
 
Would I repurchase and which skin types do I recommend the Biossance Squalane + Marine Algae Eye Cream to?
While I enjoy the cream, I am pretty set in my eye cream ways: Something light in the mornings and something with retinol at night, so I don’t think I will repurchase.  To be honest, I didn’t see any firming and lifting when I used the cream either, but wouldn’t expect skincare to have that effect. (More info: My current favorite skincare of 2021)
It has a beautiful texture though and definitely has an immediate smoothing effect on the under eyes, so I think it will work great as morning eye cream for those that have mature skin with fine lines that their concealer tends to settle into, as this was efficiently prevented for me with a layer of Biossance before makeup.
 
Pin me!
 
Shop this one or my favorite eye creams here

Don’t forget to check out the Discount Code Page on top if you want to save some money on your next skincare purchase.
If you want to get a vote in the next Ask Doctor Anne Topic, Ingredient Spotlight or product I review, don’t forget you can head over to my Patreon account to get more involved!
 
tweet share save share share (Visited 2.118 times, 1 visits today)

 




 Jump to the Comments 




 
Ceramides in skincare – benefits and side effects | Ask Doctor Anne 




 
Is fragrance in skincare bad for you? | Ask Doctor Anne 




 
All the benefits of Green Tea Extract in skincare | Ask Doctor Anne 




Beitrags-Navigation
Older PostNewer Post
 




Schlagwörteraging skin
Anti-aging
Antiaging
Anti aging
Beauty
best skincare products for aging skin
Cleanser
Favorites
Hautpflege
Hyperpigmentation
hyperpigmentation treatment
Inspired by
Linda Libra Loca
lindalibraloca
look younger
Makeup
Mature Skin
Moisturizer
Oily Skin
over 30 beauty
over 40
over 40 beauty
Personal
pigment
pigmentation treatment
Pixi
pixi skintreats
Review
Schminke
Schönheit
Serum
Skincare
Skin Care
skincare for aging skin
skincare for mature skin
skincare products for aging skin
Skincare Review
skincare reviews
Skincare Routine
Skincare Tips
Sunscreen
The Body Shop
THE INKEY LIST
Tutorial
You Tube

First Name



Email address: 




Wenn du ein Mensch bist, lasse das Feld leer: 







April photo dump - apparently most of what I did w


 





Is natural fragrance really better than synthetic 
 





(unpaid advertisement bc brand linked/ purchased m
 





Are there physical, measurable changes in people w
 





(unpaid advertisment bc brand linked/ purchased my
 





Why do some people get Seasonal Affective Disorder
 





(Unpaid advertisement bc brand linked/ PR, gifted)
 





What is Seasonal Affective Disorder? Let’s talk 
 





(Unpaid advertisement bc PR/ gifted)
Let’s talk 
 





You have probably heard that Panthenol is good for
 





(Unpaid advertisement bc brand linked/ PR gifted)

 





Is Panthenol good for acne?
Well, it surely isn’
 





How do you actually use the ZIIP GX device? Here i
 





You might have heard about Panthenol a lot in your
 





Spring is in the air - time to think about changin
 





Here is what I always take with me when we go to t
 


 


Mehr laden…






 Auf Instagram folgen






 

Theme by EmPress











Privacy Preferences
I Agree









 

Privacy Preference Center




Options




Consent Management







Consent Management





Privacy Policy



ON
OFF



You read and agreed to our Privacy Policy.

























OK



























Diese Website benutzt Cookies. Wenn du die Website weiter nutzt, gehen wir von deinem Einverständnis aus.OKNein
Du kannst deine Zustimmung jederzeit widerrufen, indem du den den Button „Zustimmung widerrufen“ klickst.Cookies widerrufen


 




