Document Name: role of Zinc Oxide in Cream4
Document link: https://www.woundsource.com/blog/topical-zinc-oxide-and-wound-healing




























Topical Zinc Oxide and Wound Healing | WoundSource



































Skip to main content





























Toggle navigation






















WoundSource Product Guide
Education WoundCon
Practice Accelerator
Webinars
White Papers
Continuing Education

Blog/News WoundSource Blog
Wound Care News

About Us About WoundSource
Editorial Advisory Board

Contact Us Contact Us
Submit an Article
Request a Media Kit

 







 









Home
Blogs
Aletha Tippett MD's blog
 
Topical Zinc Oxide and Wound Healing






  


Printer-friendly version





Submitted by Aletha Tippett MD on April 27th, 2017Keywords: Wound Dressings, Product Education, Product Selection, Wound Healing, DressingsBlog Category: DressingsBy Aletha Tippett MD
Well, what a surprise to find that what you have been doing all along is really the right thing to do even though you didn’t know the reason. Always, over the years doing wound care, I applied a thick layer of zinc oxide ointment around the patient’s wound, then put my dressing on the wound and covered  it with a topping, usually plastic wrap pressed into the zinc oxide ointment.  
My rationale for dressing wounds in this manner was that the zinc oxide protected the periwound skin from moisture, preventing damage. Zinc oxide not only does that, but it also enhances healing as I found out in the most recent issue of Wounds. There was a very nice review article published in April about zinc and wound healing.  I knew that my wounds healed, but was not aware of the impact of the zinc oxide.
What is Zinc Oxide?
Zinc is a trace element very abundant in the body. While it is known that zinc deficiency can cause delayed wound healing, the actual role of zinc in wound healing was not known. A number of experimental studies and clinical trials have been conducted using zinc. Results showed that topical zinc oxide had increased wound healing, increased reepithelialization, decreased rates of infection and decreased rates of deterioration of ulcers. Topical zinc oxide has shown to improve the rate of wound healing in patients, regardless of their zinc status. Oral zinc supplementation in zinc deficient patients did not have the same effect. 
The animal studies reviewed showed that zinc sulfate did not enhance wound healing, but delayed it. One of the major roles for zinc in wound healing was found that zinc oxide enhances the ability of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) to enzymatically break down collagen fragments. There are few clinical studies, but they have all shown a positive benefit for topical zinc oxide, and of interest, especially when used for debridement in burns.  
Further research on the topic of zinc in wound management has been recommended, but for now, I would say use zinc oxide whenever possible. I certainly will continue using it in my wound care practice, especially now I know it is actively helping the wound.
Reference:
Kogan S, Sood A, Granick M. Zinc and Wound Healing:  A Review of Zinc Physiology and Clinical Applications.Wounds. 2017;29(4): 102-106.
About The Author
Aletha Tippett MD is a family medicine and wound care expert, founder and president of the Hope of Healing Foundation®, family physician, and international speaker on wound care.
The views and opinions expressed in this blog are solely those of the author, and do not represent the views of WoundSource, Kestrel Health Information, Inc., its affiliates, or subsidiary companies.
Aletha Tippett MD's blog
Log in to post comments
Printer-friendly version
 





Recommended for You


  
 
 
 
Periwound Management: Preparation, Protection, Problems 
 
February 3rd, 2022 
 
by Cathy L. Wogamon, DNP, MSN, FNP-BC, CWON, CFCN
The periwound is generally defined as the area from the wound edge to 4 cm beyond circumferentially. Breakdown of the periwound can adversely affect wound healing even if the wound itself is doing well. After the initial... 

 
 
 
Cellular and/or Tissue-Based Products: Helping to Close Chronic Wounds 
 
August 31st, 2022 
 
Wound healing typically progresses through four phases: hemostasis, inflammation, cell proliferation or granulation and repair, and epithelialization and remodeling of scar tissue. Clinicians should achieve wound closure through a standardized framework such as the TIMERS (tissue management,... 

 
 
 
 Do You Know the Six Pillars of Chronic Wound Care? 
 
April 29th, 2022 
 
By Emily Greenstein, APRN, CNP, CWON, FACCWS
After attending the Spring Symposium for Advanced Wound Care and hearing many great lectures, I got to thinking, “What are the pillars of chronic wound care?” We have all heard of the concept “look at the whole patient and not the hole... 
 










 
 
 
Aletha Tippett 
 
 
 
Advanced Wound Team 
 
  




Bloggers


- Choose -  
          
3M Health Care    
          
Hy-Tape International    
          
Tissue Analytics    
          
American College of Hyperbaric Medicine (ACHM)    
          
Lindsay Andronaco    
          
Alex M.  Aningalan    
          
Jessica  Aragon    
          
Linda Arundel    
          
Frank Aviles Jr     
          
Sharon Baranoski    
          
Karen Bauer    
          
Vita Boyar    
          
Mary  Brennan    
          
Charles Buscemi    
          
Kelly Byrd-Jenkins, CWS    
          
Cheryl Carver    
          
Susan Cleveland    
          
Windy Cole    
          
Lydia Corum    
          
Kara S.  Couch    
          
Heidi Cross    
          
Ryan Cummings    
          
Kim Coy Decoste    
          
Tia Gray and Donald Thomas    
          
Paula Erwin-Toth    
          
WoundCon Faculty    
          
Robin Lenz and  Fahad Hussain    
          
Elizabeth Faust    
          
Luis Fernandez    
          
Caroline Fife    
          
Diana L. Gallagher    
          
Kathy Gallagher    
          
Susan Gallagher    
          
Emily Greenstein    
          
Christi Greer    
          
Shivani Gupta    
          
Rick Hall    
          
Kari Harman    
          
Cathy Harmon     
          
Janis Harrison    
          
Beth Hawkins Bradley    
          
Margaret Heale    
          
Polly Hendrix    
          
Michel Hermans    
          
Mark Hinkes    
          
David Hite    
          
Joy Hooper    
          
Holly Hovan    
          
Sue Hull    
          
 Industry News    
          
Fabiola Jimenez    
          
Alton Johnson Jr.    
          
Steven Kahn    
          
Martha Kelso    
          
Terri Kolenich    
          
Diane Krasner    
          
Samantha Kuplicki    
          
Jenny Lam    
          
Lauren Lazarevski    
          
Karen Lou Kennedy-Evans and  Leslie Ritter    
          
Jeffrey M. Levine    
          
April Lumpkins    
          
Colton Mason    
          
James McGuire     
          
Brandy  Mckeown    
          
M. Mark  Melin    
          
Christine  Miller    
          
Michael Miller    
          
Catherine Milne    
          
Michele  Mongillo, BSN, MSN, RAC-CT    
          
Glenda Motta    
          
Nancy  Munoz    
          
Becky Naughton    
          
Marcia Nusgart    
          
Marta Ostler    
          
Roshni  Patel    
          
Mary Ellen Posthauer    
          
Ivy Razmus    
          
Tracey  Rickards    
          
Jonathan Rosenfeld    
          
Bruce Ruben    
          
Dianne  Rudolph    
          
Gregory Schultz    
          
Thomas E.  Serena    
          
Ron Sherman    
          
Robert Snyder    
          
The Alliance of Wound Care Stakeholders    
          
Laurie Swezey    
          
Cynthia  Sylvia    
          
Liping Tang    
          
 Temple University School of Podiatric Medicine    
          
Thanoon Thabet     
          
Kathi Thimsen    
          
Anthony Tickner    
          
Aletha Tippett    
          
Theresa Valent    
          
Martin Vera    
          
Frances  Wilson     
          
Janet Wolfson    
          
 WoundSource Editors    
          
 WoundSource Practice Accelerator    
          
Karen Zulkowski  Go


 



Blog Categories


- Choose -  
          
Adjunctive Therapies    
          
Advanced Therapies    
          
Atypical and Complex Wounds    
          
Biofilm and Infected Wounds    
          
Clinician Education    
          
Compression    
          
Diabetic Foot Ulcers    
          
Dressings    
          
Industry Voices    
          
Legal Issues    
          
Lymphedema    
          
Negative Pressure Wound Therapy    
          
Nutrition    
          
Palliative Wound Care    
          
Patient Issues    
          
Practice Management    
          
Pressure Ulcers    
          
Reimbursement    
          
Risk Assessment and Prevention    
          
Skin Conditions/Skin Care    
          
Surgical Wounds    
          
Venous Ulcers    
          
Wound Assessment and Documentation    
          
Wound Bed Preparation    
          
Wound Care 101    
          
Wound Care News    
          
Wound Care Technology  Go


 
























Upcoming Webinars



 
 
 
Wrapping it Up! A Guide to Treating Venous Leg Ulcers 
 
May 03, 2023 12:30 pm to 1:00 pm EDT Register  

 
 
 
T.I.M.E. to change: Exudate Management 
 
May 18, 2023 2:00 pm to 3:00 pm EDT Register  




On-Demand Webinars


  
 
Specialty Mattresses or Under Pads: Why Should You Have to Choose One or the Other for Your Patients? 
 Presenter:  
Maria Kotula and Justin Kerr 

 
Can standardized use of a pure hypochlorous acid-preserved cleanser (pHA) improve outcomes? 
 Presenter:  
Neilendu Kundu, MD and Kara Couch, MS, CRNP, CWCN-AP, FAAWC 

 
Clinical and Health Economic Benefits Associated with a Two-Layer Bandage Featuring the unique Dual Compression System (DCS) 
 Presenter:  
Lucian G. Vlad, MD and Louis Pilati, MD 
 
 

See more on-demand webinars 



White Papers


  
 
 
 
Trending Topics from WoundCon Spring 2023 

 
 
 
Improve Your Wound Care Program with Clinical ROI 

 
 
 
Implementing Wound Hygiene: A Stepwise Approach 

 
 
 
Quick Facts - Wound Hygiene 
 

View All White Papers




 







Important Notice: The contents of the website such as text, graphics, images, and other materials contained on the website ("Content") are for informational purposes only. The Content is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. The content is not intended to substitute manufacturer instructions. Always seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition or product usage. Refer to the Legal Notice for express terms of use.























Products
By Category
By Company
By HCPCS Code
By Patient Condition
By Product
Buy WoundSource 2022
Request Product Information
Submit a Product




Content
Blog
Industry Voices
News
Newsletter Archive
Webinars
White Papers




User Center
About WoundSource
Editorial Advisory Board
Submit an Article
Newsletter Subscription
Contact Us




         

 






Request a Media Kit
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
Linking & RSS Policy
Legal Notice




© 2008-2023 HMP Global, Inc. All rights reserved.










