Document Name: role of Urea in Protective Cream3
Document link: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/urea































Urea  | DermNet













































DermNet provides Google Translate, a free machine translation service. Note that this may not provide an exact translation in all languages









logo-white-2022












Topics A-Z


Images


Cases


Jobs


More 
selector copy










Skin checker


About


Browse


Glossary


Quizzes


Donate


Contact










searchable









Translate 















TOPICS A-Z 


IMAGES 


CASES 


JOBS 


SKIN CHECKER 


ABOUT 


BROWSE 


GLOSSARY 


QUIZZES 


DONATE 


CONTACT 
















Home


    arrow-right-small-blue
  



Topics A–Z


    arrow-right-small-blue
  



 Urea 





info-icon









print-icon













            Urea — codes and concepts
        




Synonyms:

Carbamide,
Carbonyldiamide



Categories:

Treatment or procedure



Subcategories:

Natural skin moisturiser,
Emollient,
Mechanism of action as an emollient,
Topical urea preparations,
Use of urea emollients



ICD-11:

PL00



SNOMED CT:

387092000, 48279009, 771812008, 292622004






Urea

Author: Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer, 2005.





toc-icon










                Table of contents
                


    arrow-right-small
  





Introduction
How it works
Preparations
How to use
Side effects


















What is urea?Urea is naturally present in healthy skin. It is one of three natural moisturising factors in the outer horny layer of our skin. The other two natural moisturising factors are lactic acid and amino acids. There are markedly reduced amounts of urea in dry skin conditions.Topical preparations of synthetically manufactured urea, either alone or in combination with other medicines, can be particularly useful in treating scaly and itchy dry skin conditions including:Atopic dermatitis (eczema)
Psoriasis
Ichthyosis.
Urea is also known as carbamide.How does urea work?Urea preparations are emollients that are essential in the management of dry skin conditions. Emollients moisturise dry skin by reducing water loss from the epidermis (upper layer of skin) resulting in softer and more supple skin.The specific actions of urea include:Hydrating effects — urea is strongly hygroscopic (water-loving) and draws and retains water within skin cells
Keratolytic effects — urea softens the horny layer so it can be easily released from the surface of the skin
Regenerative skin protection — urea has a direct protective effect against drying influences and if used regularly improves the capacity of the epidermal barriers for regeneration
Irritation-soothing effects — urea has anti-pruritic activity based on local anaesthetic effects
Penetration-assisting effects — urea can increase the penetration of other substances such as corticosteroids, as it increases skin hydration
Urea preparationsUrea preparations come in several forms and strengths. Available dosage forms include cream, lotion, shampoo, gel and shower/bath washes. Strengths of urea preparations range from 3–40%. The form and strength chosen depend on the condition that is being treated and the severity of the condition.The most commonly used urea preparation in New Zealand is a 10% cream. The cream helps urea to retain water for longer in the stratum corneum and prevents water loss by slowing down evaporation. Urea 40% aqueous solution can be made up by a pharmacist and has been used for the treatment of black hairy tongues, acne conglobata, and to dissolve and remove diseased nails (medical nail avulsion).Most urea preparations are available from your pharmacy. Higher strength preparations and preparations that contain other active ingredients, such as corticosteroids (hydrocortisone), may only be available on a doctor's prescription.












How to use urea preparationsUrea preparations are for external use only.Avoid contact with eyes.
Do not use on broken (cracked or bleeding) skin or on any area that is infected or oozing, or where there is severe widespread reddening of the skin.
Urea preparations may be used in children from 1 year and upwards if there is a diagnosed dry skin condition and it has been recommended by the doctor.
For non-diagnosed conditions (normal-dry skin), low strength urea preparations may be used from 3 years of age and upwards.
What are the side effects of urea preparations?Urea preparations are usually well tolerated. Side effects that may occur include mild stinging, itching and skin rash. These usually do not require medical attention unless they continue and become bothersome.



























 

On DermNet NZScaly skin diseases
Emollients and moisturisers
Kava dermopathy
Occupational dermatitis among construction workers
Medical nail avulsion
Other websitesConsumer medicine information and data sheets — Medsafe
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements — MedlinePlus
 
Books about skin diseasesBooks about the skin
Dermatology Made Easy book




 
Related information

































Sign up to the newsletter






Full name




Email address




Tell us your profession or specialty

Profession or specialty
	
Dermatologist
	
GP
	
HCP
	
Marketing/media
	
Medical student or physician in training
	
Patient
	
Caregiver
	





SPAM PROTECTION - DO NOT FILL THIS FIELD IN

















IMPORTANT NOTE:


DermNet does not provide an online consultation service.If you have any concerns with your skin or its treatment, see a dermatologist for advice.







Sponsors
Donate
Website terms
FAQ
Advertising policy
Privacy policy
Image licence
Newsletter
Volunteer
Submit a photo







logo-white-2022









  © 2023 DermNet New Zealand Trust. 



footer-facebook






footer-twitter






footer-youtube






footer-instagram











        Creative Commons License
    





























logo-dark-2022







© 2023 DermNet New Zealand Trust. 
DermNet does not provide an online consultation service. If you have any concerns with your skin or its treatment, see a dermatologist for advice.








