Document Name: role of Beeswax in Eye Cream3
Document link: https://www.newdirectionsaromatics.com/blog/products/all-about-beeswax.html






Beeswax - Nature's Most Precious Gift - Benefits and Uses Skin & Hair






































Blog Home
 Articles
 - Aromatherapy - How to Store Essential Oils - Technical Information - Useful Guides Products
 - Absolute Oils - Butters - Carrier Oils - Essential Oils - Botanical Extracts - Cosmetic Raw Materials - Floral Waters - Fragrance Oils - Herbal Oils - Other - Packaging - Spa Recipes
 - Essential Oil Recipes - Lip Balm Recipes - Bath Bomb Recipes - Butter Recipes - Massage Oils and Blends 















 SHOP

  |  

  |  

  |  

  |  











Blog Home|Articles 



AromatherapyHow to Store Essential OilsTechnical InformationUseful Guides




|Products 



Absolute OilsButtersCarrier OilsEssential OilsBotanical ExtractsCosmetic Raw MaterialsFloral WatersFragrance OilsHerbal OilsOtherPackagingSpa




|Recipes 



Essential Oil RecipesLip Balm RecipesBath Bomb RecipesButter RecipesMassage Oils and Blends




 




 







Blog
ProductsA BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO BEESWAX 





A BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO BEESWAX



Content

History of Beeswax
Benefits of Beeswax
Uses of Beeswax
Guide to Beeswax
Contraindications for Beeswax

 

IN ESSENCE...

Beeswax is a natural substance generated and secreted by honey bees. It is hard and breakable when cold but soft and pliable when heated.

Just like honey, Beeswax varies in color, depending on various factors related to the bees themselves as well as the flowers from which the honey is derived.

There are 3 main types of Beeswax: Yellow, White, and Absolute. They vary in their processing methods, benefits, and uses.

Used in aromatherapy, Beeswax is known for its long, slow, clean, smoke-less burn. It not only exudes the aroma of honey but it also produces comparatively brighter flames, facilitates the elimination of airborne pollutants, and promotes the overall health of body and mind.

Used cosmetically, Beeswax hydrates, conditions, soothes, and calms the skin. It exfoliates, repairs damage, promotes the skin’s regeneration, diminishes the appearance of the signs of aging, soothes itchiness and irritation, and creates a hydrating, long-lasting protective barrier against environmental pollutants. Used in hair, Beeswax nourishes, conditions, and softens the strands while and promoting the hair’s luster.

Used medicinally, Beeswax helps soothe and facilitate the healing of abrasions. It prevents harmful bacteria from entering the body through chapped and broken skin and it provides the skin with a layer of protection against external irritants. Its antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties benefit those who suffer from topical allergies or skin ailments, such as eczema and rosacea.



 
HISTORY OF BEESWAX USAGE
Beeswax is a natural substance generated and secreted by honey bees that use it to develop their honeycombs. Beeswax is comprised largely of fatty acids, hydrocarbons, and esters. The wax is hard and breakable when cold but soft and pliable when heated or exposed to human body temperature. Because Beeswax does not spoil, become rancid, or otherwise expire, it can continue to be reheated and reused.
Like the varying colors of honey, the color of the wax depends on the age of the bees, the flowers from which they gather the nectar, the region of flower growth, and the purity of the honey. Beeswax ranges in color from almost white to black, although it is typically a shade along the yellow spectrum, appearing to be bright yellow, butterscotch yellow, or light amber. These colors are due to the pollen, resin, and gum content in the originating honey. These elements are also responsible for contributing to the agreeable scent of both the honey and the wax.
While Beeswax is commonly known for its light-bearing ability and for thus being a source of heat, historically, it has also been valuable for its versatile applications, which include culinary uses, such as food flavoring and food storage. For example, it continues to be used to coat or glaze cheeses in order to create an air-tight seal to prevent the growth of harmful bacteria. Used on some types of fruits, Beeswax prevents the loss of water while protecting them from gathering dust and from being scratched, bruised, or bitten by insects.
2000 years ago, in China, the significance and potency of Beeswax was discovered and chronicled in one of the country’s most eminent medical books, known as The Shennong Book of Herbs. The record highlighted the positive effects that Beeswax was reputed to have on the circulatory system, energy levels, and wound healing. It was also reported to have an anti-aging effect on the appearance of the complexion.
There are 3 main types of Beeswax: Yellow, White, and Absolute. Yellow Beeswax is the natural, unrefined, and raw wax derived directly from the honeycomb. White Beeswax is the result of Yellow Beeswax undergoing a filtering/purifying/bleaching process. This is the type that is used in cosmetic formulations, food preparation, and in pharmaceutical products, such as ointments, soft-gel capsules, and in coating for medicinal tablets. Beeswax Absolute is the result of treating Yellow Beeswax with Alcohol.


 
BEESWAX BENEFITS
Used in aromatherapy, the smokeless and lengthy burn time of Beeswax makes it a valuable ingredient in aromatherapy candles. Beeswax candles are also reputed to exude the aroma of honey – which can range from sweet, fresh, or floral to warm, robust, savory, or spicy – and they are also reputed to help facilitate the elimination of airborne pollutants, such as bacteria, dust, allergens, and odours. When pure and natural essential oils essential oils are added during the production phase of natural homemade candles, the resultant products are known to have enhanced fragrances. Furthermore, they are believed to promote overall physical and mental well-being by invigorating the body with increased energy, reducing stress, strengthening focus, helping decrease physical pain, and regulating blood pressure.
 

 
Used cosmetically, such as in lip products, moisturizers, and eye makeup, Beeswax hydrates, conditions, soothes, and calms the skin. Without clogging the pores and preventing the skin from being able to breathe, Beeswax creates a hydrating, long-lasting protective barrier to protect it against environmental pollutants as well as the harsh effects of the elements. Its exfoliating and reparative properties combined with its vitamin content helps promote the skin’s regeneration and rejuvenation by helping diminish the appearance of the signs of aging, including spots, wrinkles, and skin damage. Used in natural product formulations, Beeswax offers its scent, which may be characterized as mild, warm, sensual, floral, woody, rich, “oriental,” or a combination of these descriptions, depending on the preferred Beeswax. Refreshing, restorative, and gentle enough for use on even the most sensitive skin, Beeswax is known to soothe itchiness and irritation, to nourish, and to soften dry, cracked, broken areas, making it ideal for use in lip balms. Used in hair, Beeswax contributes shine that promotes the hair’s luster, making it valuable for use in hair products that promote the look of sleekness, such as pomades.
Its regenerative quality and anti-inflammatory property work in conjunction to help decrease the irritation, redness, and inflammation characteristic of acne, while its anti-septic effect further facilitates the healing process. Beeswax has a similar effect on skin afflicted with eczema and psoriasis, soothing the itchiness and working to prevent further irritation or infection. By promoting the growth of newer skin and by contributing softness, Beeswax leaves the complexion looking renewed. When applied to stretch marks, whether they are caused by a fluctuation in weight or by pregnancy, Beeswax is known to help diminish the appearance of these often-unwanted marks, when used in combination with carrier oils and butters.
Used medicinally, Beeswax makes an ideal ingredient in salves meant for treating scrapes, minor cuts, minor wounds, and burns, among other abrasions. Its anti-inflammatory and anti-viral effects help to prevent harmful bacteria from entering the body through chapped and broken skin, which is especially common in dry climates and which makes it valuable for use during the drier times of the year. By providing the skin with a layer of protection against external irritants, including harsh and extreme weather conditions that can cause roughness and dryness, Beeswax moisturizes the skin to restore its natural radiance and smoothness. The antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties of Beeswax also benefit those who suffer from topical allergies or other discomforts, such as eczema and rosacea.
 
As illustrated, Beeswax is reputed to have many therapeutic properties. The following highlights its many benefits and the kinds of activity it is believed to exhibit:

COSMETIC: Hydrating, Softening, Smoothing, Non-Comedogenic, Protective, Smoothing, Regenerative, Strengthening, Conditioning, Soothing, Collagen-Enhancing.
MEDICINAL: Anti-Allergenic, Anti-Inflammatory, Anti-Bacterial, Anti-Viral, Protective, Regenerative, Strengthening.



 
BEESWAX USES
Used in aromatherapy applications, Beeswax candles exhibit air-purifying properties. Unlike paraffin candles, they help decrease the number of airborne contaminants, such as bacteria, pet dander, and dust. To make a natural aromatherapy Beeswax candle that scents the air with its warm fragrance, cleanses indoor environments, and promotes easier breathing, begin by pouring .45 kg (1 lb.) Pure Filtered Beeswax into an empty coffee can or a metal jug that can be designated for working with wax, which can be difficult to remove from tools. Next, create a double boiler by placing the chosen vessel into a pot filled with water. The water level should not be so high that it spills into the vessel. Next, bring the water to a gentle boil, allowing it to simmer as the Beeswax melts. In the meantime, cut a 60-ply Cotton Braid Wick #4 into 3 or 4 pieces that are each 15 cm (6 inches) in length. When the Beeswax has melted entirely, remove the jug from the heat and, with a stick or a spoon, gently stir in ½ cup a preferred Carrier Oil until it is thoroughly combined with the wax. Pour 1 cm (0.5 inch/1 ml) of this wax and oil blend into 3 240 ml (8 oz.) lidded mason jars, then place the jug back into the hot water to ensure that the wax remains liquid. Place one wick in the center of the small amount of wax inside each jar and hold the wick there for 5-10 minutes to prevent it from moving while the wax hardens around it. To keep the wick vertical and to prevent it from curling, wrap it around a stick until the wick is pulled tight and upright, then place the stick across the top of the jar. When the small amount of wax has dried inside each jar, pour the remainder of the wax from the jug into each jar, leaving at least 3 cm (1 inch) of space between the surface of the wax and the openings of the jars. Leave the jars open and set them aside to allow them to cool overnight. Once the wax has completely dried and hardened, the wicks can each be trimmed ½ an inch. When using the candles, it is recommended that they remain lit for a minimum of 2.5 hours until their surfaces have melted entirely. If the flames flicker or begin to smoke, simply put them out, trim the wicks slightly, then light them again. Trimming the wicks too short will result in small flames that will cause the candles to “tunnel,” however, even tunneled candles can be melted again to create new candles once their wicks have been removed.
Used in skincare, Beeswax hydrates, soothes, repairs, and fortifies the skin. For a Beeswax-enriched lotion bar, begin by combining the following ingredients in a 950 ml (35 oz.) glass mason jar: 1 cup Beeswax, 1 cup Carrier Oil, and 1 cup body butter of personal preference (e.g. Cocoa Butter, Mango Butter, Shea Butter, or a combination of butters). Next, place the mason jar in a small saucepan filled with 1 inch of water, then place the saucepan on the stove and bring the water to a boil. Constantly stir the contents of the jar with a stick until all the ingredients have melted. Once the mixture has turned into a smooth blend, remove the double boiler from the heat. As it cools, gently but thoroughly stir in any essential oils of personal preference as well as 1 tsp. Vitamin E Liquid. Pour the blend into soap molds and allow it to harden before taking out each bar. Depending on the size of the mold, this recipe may yield approximately 12 lotion bars.
To make a moisturizing and smoothing lip balm that relieves dryness, roughness, and cracking, begin by combining 2 Tbsp. Beeswax pastilles, 2 Tbsp. Shea Butter, and 2 Tbsp. Carrier Oil in a glass bowl or jar to create a double boiler inside a pot. Stir all the ingredients together constantly until they have melted. Once the mixture achieves a smooth and even blend, remove the double boiler from the heat, keeping the bowl or jar submerged in the hot water to maintain its fluidity. As the blend begins to cool, stir in a maximum of 30 drops of any essential oil of personal preference. Next, with the help of a medicine dropper, fill each lip balm tube with the blend. This step must be done quickly to prevent the mixture from hardening even before the transfer takes place. Set the uncapped, filled tubes aside and allow them to cool and harden completely before capping them.
To make a natural, Beeswax-infused deodorant bar with a probiotic effect, first combine the following ingredients in a glass jar: ½ cup + 1 tsp. Beeswax, ½ cup Carrier Oil, and ½ cup of a body butter of personal preference (e.g. Cocoa, Shea, Mango, or a combination of all three). Place the jar in a pot filled with 1 inch of water to create a double boiler. On the stove, bring the pot of water to a boil until the jar ingredients are thoroughly melted. Once they form a smooth and even blend, remove the pot from the heat. To the jar blend, add 1 tsp. Vitamin E Liquid, 3 Tbsp. Baking Soda, ½ cup Organic Arrowroot Powder, 2-3 probiotics capsules that do not require refrigeration, and 20 drops of an essential oil of personal preference. Gently stir all the ingredients together until they have been thoroughly combined. Next, pour the liquid blend into a mold of personal choice. If the chosen mold is a stick deodorant container, the mixture must be allowed to harden for 15-20 minutes before being poured into the tube. When the mixture has cooled to a thicker consistency resembling that of a nut butter, use a spoon to scoop it and fill the tube, pressing it down to ensure it is firmly packed. Set the filled tube aside and allow the deodorant blend to cool and harden completely before using it or capping it.
Used in hair products, Beeswax locks in moisture, smooths down fly-aways, promotes easier styling, and encourages the growth of new hair. Without leaving a greasy residue, it maintains a firm hold on hairstyles but is easy to wash out. To make a conditioning, softening, shine-enhancing pomade, begin by melting 2 Tbsp. Beeswax pastilles in a double boiler. Once they have liquified, stir in 3 Tbsp. of a preferred Carrier Oil until it is thoroughly incorporated into the wax. Remove the double boiler from the heat, then add in 2 tsp. Bentonite Clay and 10 drops of a preferred Essential Oil, stirring the mixture continuously to facilitate its cooling. Next, transfer the blend into a container of personal preference. Suggested containers include small glass mason jars.
For a calming, clarifying, and balancing bedtime salve that is reputed to encourage the onset of quality sleep, begin by thoroughly combining the following oils in a small jar or bowl: 80 drops each of a “warming” Essential Oil, an “uplifting” Essential Oil, an “anti-inflammatory” Essential Oil, and a “stimulating” Essential Oil and 40 drops a “balancing” Essential Oil. This essential oil blend will be incorporated into the salve, which can be made by melting 4 Tbsp. Beeswax pastilles and 2 cups Carrier Oil in a double boiler. Stir this mixture regularly until all the ingredients have thoroughly melted. In the 10-15 minutes that it takes for the wax mixture to melt, collect 4 separate 30 ml (4 oz.) mason jars and pour 90 drops of the aforementioned essential oil blend into each jar. Once the wax mixture has achieved a smooth and even consistency, pour it into each of the jars and allow it to cool. Once the mixture has set inside each jar, cap the jars. To use this salve at bedtime, massage a small amount into the bottoms of both feet before going to sleep. To prevent the salve from getting on bedding, cover the feet with socks. This salve has an approximate shelf life of 8 months and is believed to provide a warming sensation, promote relaxation and easier breathing, reduce feelings of stress, regulate blood pressure, and balance the hormones.
Used in medicinal applications, Beeswax not only facilitates healing but it also prevents bacterial infections from developing on the skin while also promoting the skin’s regeneration and thereby helping to diminish the appearance of scarring from abrasions. For a simple yet versatile salve that is known to soothe irritation while eliminating bacteria, begin by combining 4 Tbsp. Beeswax pastilles, 1 cup Organic Extra Virgin Cold Pressed Coconut Carrier Oil, and 1 cup Grapeseed Carrier Oil in a double boiler, stirring the mixture regularly as it melts. While waiting for the mixture to melt entirely, fill 5 mason jars with a customized essential oil blend of personal preference, depending on the desired outcome. Some blend recipes are offered below. Next, fill the jars with the oil and wax mixture, leaving an inch of space between the top of the salve and the rims of the jars, then allow the salve to cool. Once it has hardened, tightly cap the jars.
For an allergy-relief blend with anti-histamine effects, combine Lavender, Lemon, and Peppermint essential oils for a total of 30 drops. This combination is believed to soothe topical allergies characterized by itching and to soften the skin while eliminating bacteria.
For a pain-relieving blend, combine 30 drops Birch Essential Oil, 10 drops Frankincense Essential Oil, and 10 drops White Fir Essential Oil. This combination is believed to reduce inflammation and pain. 
For a blend that is reputed to rejuvenate the complexion, combine 12 drops each of Cypress, Frankincense, and Lavender essential oils. This combination is believed to exhibit regenerative and restorative qualities, thus promoting a more youthful appearance.
For a vapor rub blend that helps reduce cough and cold symptoms, combine and melt 2 Tbsp. of Beeswax pastilles and ½ cup a preferred Carrier Oil in a double boiler. Once the mixture has completely melted together, stir in a total of 60 drops of essential oils that are known to have cooling, warming, and expectorant properties. Suggested oils include Clove, Eucalyptus, Peppermint, and Rosemary. Once all the ingredients have been thoroughly incorporated, pour the blend into any lidded container, tin, or jar. To use this vapor rub, simply scoop a small amount with the finger tips and massage it into the chest or the soles of the feet to decrease congestion and coughing.


 
A GUIDE TO BEESWAX VARIETIES & THEIR BENEFITS
BEESWAX BEADS (WHITE) COSMETIC GRADE REFINED
INCI: Beeswax
Country of Origin: China
Believed to: 

Have been melted then filtered through active carbon to remove its scent and color, which may vary from white to off-white
Have been shaped into small pellets for easy use
Be 100% natural and refined through physical processes without the use of chemicals
Be ideal for use in formulations where a cream base or end product is fragrance-free and white in color, but to which color and fragrance can later be added
Be suitable for use in lotions, creams, balms, body butter, and soaps
Provide body and stiffness to formulations and to assist as an incomplete emulsifier or thickener
Burn cleaner and longer than petroleum-based waxes, when used in candle-making
Believed to be the preferred type of wax for aromatherapy-grade candles, due to its slower rate of burning
Have a melting point between 62° and 67° C (143° to 152° F); thus, overheating this wax will impact its scent and color

 
BEESWAX BEADS (YELLOW) COSMETIC GRADE REFINED
INCI: Beeswax
Country of Origin: China
Believed to: 

Retain its natural fragrance
Burn cleaner and longer than petroleum-based waxes
Be ideal for use in lip balms and candle-making
Have a slow and smoke-free burn
Be made from 100% pure refined Beeswax
Have its fragrance negatively impacted by overheating

 
BEESWAX BLOCK (WHITE) COSMETIC GRADE REFINED
INCI: Beeswax
Country of Origin: China
Believed to: 

Burn longer and cleaner (no drip) than ordinary paraffin candles
Have a smokeless flame
Have a higher melting point than other waxes, thus its flame gives off more light and heat
Be pure, 100% natural, and refined through physical processes without the use of any chemicals
Be melted and filtered through active carbon to remove its scent and color, which may vary from white to off-white
Come in convenient blocks of 1 kg (2.2 lbs.) each
Be ideal for use in the manufacturing of many products such as lotions, creams, balms, body butters, and soaps
Provide body and stiffness to formulations while functioning as a thickener
Have a melting point between 62° and 67° C (143° to 152° F); thus, overheating this wax will impact its scent and color

 
BEESWAX BLOCK (YELLOW) COSMETIC GRADE REFINED
INCI: Beeswax
Country of Origin: China
Believed to: 

Have a natural but mild scent that makes it a good substitute for those with Fragrance Sensitivity and that allows for the addition of essential oils for fragrance
Burn longer and cleaner than ordinary wax candles
Have the highest melting point of any known wax
Have a smokeless flame that gives off more light and heat than other waxes without dripping
Come in blocks of 1 kg (2.2 lbs) each
Be Golden-Yellow in color
Be ideal for use in the manufacturing of many natural products including candles, soaps, natural wood polishes and pastes, and sealing wax
Be negatively impacted by overheating

 
BEESWAX PREMIUM CANADIAN ORGANIC
INCI: Beeswax
Country of Origin: Canada
Believed to: 

Be completely natural and to come in large blocks of different sizes
Be 100% pure
Retain its sweet, natural fragrance
Range in color from Yellow to Golden-Yellow
Be processed under Organic conditions that meet the USDA Standards
Produce a fragrant candle that burns longer and cleaner than ordinary wax candles
Have the highest melting point of any known wax
Have a slow, smokeless flame that gives off more light and heat than other waxes without dripping
Be primarily used to manufacture Aromatherapy and natural Beeswax candles
Act as a humectant, emollient, and emulsifying agent in formulations for lotions, creams, balms and body butters
Be negatively impacted by overheating
Be the ideal wax for those requiring unprocessed premium Beeswax

 
BEESWAX PREMIUM CANADIAN UNREFINED
INCI: Beeswax
Country of Origin: Canada
Believed to: 

Produce a fragrant candle that burns longer and cleaner than ordinary wax candles
Have the highest melting point of any known wax
Have a slow, smokeless flame that gives off more light and heat than other waxes and without dripping
Be 100% pure
Be processed using technology that meets pharmacopoeia standards for use in the pharmaceutical and cosmetic industries
Retain its sweet, natural fragrance
Range in color from Yellow to Golden-Yellow
Be ideal for use in the manufacturing of products such as cosmetics, candles, and soaps
Be negatively impacted by overheating



 
CONTRAINDICATIONS FOR BEESWAX
As with all other New Directions Aromatics products, Beeswax is for external use only. It is imperative to consult a medical practitioner before using this product for therapeutic purposes. Pregnant and nursing women are especially advised not to use Beeswax without the medical advice of a physician, as it is unclear whether any potential negative effects are transferable to babies at these stages of development. This product should always be stored in an area that is inaccessible to children, especially those under the age of 7.
Prior to using Beeswax, a skin test is recommended. This can be done by applying a dime-size amount of melted Beeswax to a small area of skin that is not sensitive and leaving it on the area for 15-20 minutes. Beeswax must never be used near the eyes, inner nose, and ears, or on any other particularly sensitive areas of skin. Potential side effects of Beeswax include sensitization, redness, pain, itchiness, burning, contact dermatitis, shortness of breath, swelling/crusting/rash around the mouth/lips/tongue, rash, tiny bumps, and difficulty swallowing or speaking. Those with hay fever, rhinitis, and allergies to pollen, propolis, or honey should avoid the use of Beeswax.
Those seeking medical care to manage moods, behaviors, or disorders should treat this product as a complementary remedy rather than a replacement for any medicinal treatments or prescriptions. In the event of an allergic reaction, discontinue use of the product and see a doctor, pharmacist, or allergist immediately for a health assessment and appropriate remedial action. To prevent side effects, consult with a medical professional prior to use.
 
 



IMPORTANT: All New Directions Aromatics (NDA) products are for external use only unless otherwise indicated. This information is not intended to diagnose, treat, cure, or prevent any disease, and it should not be used by anyone who is pregnant or under the care of a medical practitioner. Please refer to our policies for further details, and our disclaimer below.

Read Disclaimer






Buy Products


WaxesView our complete range of WaxesCandle Waxes (Plant Based)View our complete range of Candle Waxes (Plant Based)Essential OilsView our complete range of Essential OilsCarrier OilsView our complete range of Carrier OilsRaw MaterialsView our complete range of Raw Materials 
 Beeswax Premium Canadian Unrefined
USD $229.95 (14.3lbs) - $425.83 (30.8lbs)



 Beeswax Beads (White) Cosmetic Grade Refined
USD $22.99 (2.2lbs) - $357.54 (44lbs)



 Beeswax Block (White) Cosmetic Grade Refined
USD $20.99 (2.2lbs) - $324.50 (44lbs)



 Beeswax Beads (Yellow) Cosmetic Grade Refined
USD $21.99 (2.2lbs) - $341.81 (44lbs)



 Beeswax Block (Yellow) Cosmetic Grade Refined
USD $19.99 (2.2lbs) - $308.00 (44lbs)





Read about Cosmetic Raw Materials Types





ALOE VERA GEL JUICE






ARROWROOT POWDER






CETYL ALCOHOL






CITRIC ACID






COCO GLUCOSIDE






COLLOIDAL OATMEAL






EXFOLIANTS






FOAMING BATH BUTTER






GLYCERYL STEARATE SE






GRAPEFRUIT SEED EXTRACT






HYALURONIC ACID






MENTHOL CRYSTALS






OLIVE SQUALANE






POWDER BOTANICAL EXTRACTS






POWDERED FRUIT EXTRACTS






ROSEMARY ANTIOXIDANT






SODIUM COCOYL ISETHIONATE






STEARIC ACID






VEGETABLE GLYCERINE






WITCH HAZEL DISTILLATE










Save Up to 15% Off Sitewide! Use Code SPRING2023






Modal title
Close










Copyright ©1997-2023 New Directions Aromatics Inc. 
All rights reserved.


















