Document Name: role of Epsom Salts in Eye Cream1
Document link: https://health.clevelandclinic.org/7-things-you-probably-didnt-know-about-epsom-salt/








Epsom Salt: Potential Benefits and How to Use It – Cleveland Clinic














































 

















Skip to content	





Cleveland Clinic
























Menu 

Health Library
Find a Doctor
Make an Appointment
News
Careers
Contact Us
 

Primary Menu







 

Cleveland Clinic


HealthEssentials-Logo





Search for:

Search








Toggle search on small screen





Primary Menu




Health A-Z

Allergies
Brain & Spine Health
Cancer Care
Chronic Pain
Cold & Flu
Diabetes & Endocrinology
Digestive
Ear, Nose & Throat
Eye Care
Heart Health

Aneurysms and Aorta Disease
Congenital Heart Disease
Coronary Artery Disease
Heart Failure
Heart Healthy Living
Heart News
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
Our Doctors
Pericardial Conditions
Rhythm Disorders
Valve Disorders


Infectious Disease
Lung
Oral Health
Orthopaedics
Rehabilitation & Home Health
Rheumatology & Immunology
Skin Care & Beauty
Transplant
Urinary & Kidney Health


Living Healthy

Children’s Health
Family Medicine
Genomic Medicine
Men’s Health
News & Innovation
Pregnancy & Childbirth
Senior Health
Sex & Relationships
Sleep
Wellness
Women’s Health


Diet, Food & Fitness

Nutrition
Recipes
Sports Health & Fitness
Weight Loss


 







Advertising Policy
 


 
 


 

Looking for health + wellness advice? 

Get it delivered right to your inbox 

Sign up 









April 28, 2022 / Wellness 
Should You Take an Epsom Salt Bath?
Take a soak to soothe sore muscles

Share




Facebook





Twitter





Linkedin





Pinterest



email


Email




 

Integrative medicine is a branch of healthcare that focuses on treating both the mind and body and exploring how they are closely connected. Some of the treatments and practices used by integrative medicine’s holistic approach include acupuncture, hypnotherapy and reiki.

Advertising Policy
 

Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services. Policy



Another tool that integrative medical specialists often recommend for its physical and mental health benefits is Epsom salt. While no clinical trials have confirmed the benefits of Epsom salt, many healthcare providers promote it for its ease of use, reasonable price and minimally invasive delivery. To learn more, we turn to integrative medicine specialist Naoki Umeda, MD.
What is Epsom salt?
Epsom salt is one of many naturally occurring mineral salts, a compound of magnesium and sulfate in rock-like formations. The name “Epsom salt” is a nod to the town of Epsom, located a stone’s throw away from London in England, where the salt was supposedly discovered about 400 years ago.
While it resembles table salt, it has a very bitter taste and isn’t really meant to be consumed. Most users dissolve it in a warm bath for a soak with the hope of relieving stress or sore muscles.
How can you use Epsom salt?
The idea is that when you pour Epsom salt into warm water, it dissolves the magnesium and sulfate and allows it to be absorbed into your body through your skin. Centuries of user testimonials claim wonderful benefits from using Epsom salt this way.
Scientific research, however, isn’t quite as vocal in its support. There are no definitive studies showing that magnesium can be absorbed through your skin in sufficient amounts to address potential deficiencies of the mineral. And what research has been done offers skepticism.

Advertising Policy

Still, integrative medical experts commonly recommend Epsom salt to people with muscle pain and mental stress. If you want to try it for yourself, the process is pretty simple and light in risk.
Pour about 300 grams (1.25 cups) of Epsom salt into a clean bathtub as it fills with hot water. (Avoid using Epsom salt in a tub with jets, a hot tub or a whirlpool bath unless the manufacturer says it’s OK.)Once the bath is drawn, test the water for its heat level and adjust as needed. You don’t want to scald yourself.Slowly ease yourself into the tub and relax. A 15-minute soak should be enough.
When purchasing Epsom salt, look to buy a product that’s 100% magnesium sulfate.
The benefits of an Epsom salt bath
Despite the lack of available scientific data, tales about the healing power of Epsom salt have been circulating for centuries, says Dr. Umeda. Users typically dissolve Epsom salt in bath water to release magnesium and sulfate ions and reap the benefits.
Stress relief
While some experts suggest that stress relief comes from the warm bath itself, others believe Epsom salt helps stabilize mood and relieve stress, anxiety and depression. In fact, some claim that taking magnesium increases serotonin (happiness or relaxation hormone) production in your brain.
Muscle pain
Epsom salt is used to relax muscles and relieve pain in the shoulders, neck, back and skull. For example, by relaxing the muscles surrounding your skull, the magnesium in Epsom salt may help release a headache or migraine. This benefit can also aid sore muscles in the recovery period after a workout.

Advertising Policy

Inflammation
Some experts also think that magnesium is good for reducing inflammation in internal organs. This may help reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease and improve digestion/bowel movement.
Side effects of an Epsom salt bath
Generally, there aren’t any — but there are some instances where caution is advised, says Dr. Umeda. Epsom salt baths aren’t recommended for people with:
Severe skin inflammation.Skin infections.Open wounds.Severe burns.
Additionally, drinking Epsom salt — as some online “detox” plans tout — can cause serious side effects such as severe diarrhea, cautions Dr. Umeda. There aren’t any studies proving that taking Epsom salt orally is safe or beneficial. Taking it orally can lead to sudden and dramatic changes in bowel behavior; this, in turn, can be very dangerous and cause dehydration and discomfort.
If you’re curious about Epsom salt baths or have any concerns, check with your healthcare provider before using Epsom salts.



Share




Facebook





Twitter





Linkedin





Pinterest



email


Email


integrative medicine magnesium muscle recovery reduce stress 



Advertising Policy








Advertising Policy
 

Cleveland Clinic is a non-profit academic medical center. Advertising on our site helps support our mission. We do not endorse non-Cleveland Clinic products or services. Policy







Advertising Policy
 



Advertising Policy
 



Advertising Policy
 



Advertising Policy
 





Advertising Policy
 


Related Articles





October 25, 2022 / Diet, Food & Fitness



 



October 25, 2022 / Diet, Food & Fitness




Signs You May Have a Magnesium Deficiency 






June 29, 2021 / Nutrition



 



June 29, 2021 / Nutrition




Does Magnesium Help You Sleep? 






April 1, 2022 / Mental Health



 



April 1, 2022 / Mental Health




Could You Benefit From Sensory Deprivation Tank Therapy? 








October 27, 2020 / Brain & Spine



 



October 27, 2020 / Brain & Spine




4 Drug-Free Ways to Fight Your Migraine Headaches 






September 2, 2022 / Orthopaedics



 



September 2, 2022 / Orthopaedics




Should You Use Numbing Spray To Wear Uncomfortable Shoes? 






February 10, 2022 / Skin Care & Beauty



 



February 10, 2022 / Skin Care & Beauty




Is It Psoriasis or Ringworm? 









Trending Topics





 



1


Is Red Wine Good for Your Heart? 







 



2


Artificial Sweetener Erythritol’s Major Health Risks 







 



3


Best Ingredients and Products for Your Anti-Aging Skin Care Routine 















Facebook







Twitter







YouTube







Instagram





LinkedIn







Pinterest







Snapchat








Health Essentials 
Home
About Cleveland Clinic
Careers at Cleveland Clinic
Giving
Office of Diversity & Inclusion
Community Outreach
Research & Innovations
Health Library
Free Health eNewsletters
Resources for Medical Professionals
Media Relations
 


Social Media & Mobile Apps 
Send Us Feedback
About this Website
Advertising Policy
Social Media Policy
Copyright, Reprints & Licensing
Website Terms of Use
Website Privacy Policy
Notice of Privacy Practices
Non-Discrimination Notice




Resources 
Mobile Apps
Podcasts
 


Cleveland Clinic © 1995-2023. All Rights Reserved. 






Share this article via email






 
1 / 2 


 
2 / 2 



Left Arrow
Previous


Right Arrow
Next





Should You Take an Epsom Salt Bath? While there’s some skepticism around the effectiveness of Epsom salt baths, an expert explains the benefits you could get from a good soak.






Share this article via email with one or more people using the form below. 

To*



From*




Yes! Send me expert insights each week in  Health Essentials News


Submit
























