Document Name: role of Pigments in Cover Cream2
Document link: http://www.bondenavant.com/rituel-de-fille-review-creme-pigments/




 Rituel De Fille Review - Creme Multi-Purpose Pigments






























































 















YouTube
Instagram
TikTok
Blog
PROMOS
 









Amy Chang / July 10, 2017 / Beauty

Nontoxic Multi-Purpose Cremé Pigments That Will Have You Saying “NARS – who?”




Product: Rituel De Fille Inner Glow Cremé Pigments 
Why you’ll love them: Cream multi-purpose (eyes, cheeks & lips) products have a special place in my heart. I’m a lazy makeup girl these days. If I can’t apply it or blend it easily with my fingers, chances are said product will eventually migrate it’s way to the back of my bathroom drawer – aka the graveyard. Which is one reason why I’ve fallen hard for Los Angeles based brand Rituel De Fille and their Inner Glow Cremé Pigments. My sister whom prefers men’s t-shirts, purchases mascara every five years and wears makeup every solar eclipse, could blend these foolproof cream pigments with her eyes closed. They have a silkiness and slip that oozes high-quality, and effortlessly melts into your skin for a quick, no-fuss, flawless makeup look. 
But once you’re done fawning over the ease of use, you can revel in their clean ingredient list. We’re talking free of parabens, sulfates, synthetic fragrances and dyes, and they’re cruelty-free. So you’ll feel good about wearing them on bare skin.
And my final lyrics to finish off this song of praise, discusses how these wearable colors can go from sheer to deep offering intense complexity and versatility. After one play session with these multi-purpose pigments and you may forget about NARS (who by-the-way have recently removed their cruelty-free label on their products – eek) and make your way over to the green side. 
(See below for the swatches of the colors Spellbound (my fave!!!), Envious and Lovesick that were graciously sent to me by their PR rep to test.) 
Tips: Spellbound is a gorgeous neutral that can be mixed with brighter tones to create a softer look. If you get two, make sure one of them is Spellbound!! 
Price: $29 

 





WEARING: Spellbound on eyes, cheeks, forehead, jawline and lips. *Mixed inner lip area with Envious.



PRODUCT: Inner Glow Cremé Pigments | COLOR: Spellbound



WEARING: Envious on eyes, cheeks and lips.



PRODUCT: Inner Glow Cremé Pigments | COLOR: Envious



WEARING: Lovesick on eyes, cheeks and lips. *Eyes mixed with Spellbound.



PRODUCT: Inner Glow Cremé Pigments | COLOR: Lovesick 

Written & Photographed by Amy Chang, founder + editor

 

Follow:
    



 cream blush, green beauty, nontoxic makeup, rituel de fille 



 Previous Post Y et Beauté Organic Lipsticks Review Pt. 2 – Swatches Next Post  Flavor ID is taking organic meal delivery to a whole other level (One word: Gourmet)

















											© 2023 
ABOUT
Terms & Disclaimer
 

Site Design by pipdig 
























