Document Name: role of Ganex V216 in Cover Cream1
Document link: https://www.ulprospector.com/en/na/PersonalCare/Detail/305/8081/Antaron-V-216-Ganex-V-216-polymer




Antaron™ V-216 (Ganex™ V-216) polymer by Ashland - Personal Care & Cosmetics












































Login


Register


English 



                              English
                            



                              Français
                            



                              Deutsch
                            



                              Español
                            



                              Português
                            



                              简体中文
                            



                              繁體中文
                            



                              日本語
                            




North America 



                              Asia Pacific
                            



                              Europe (EMEA)
                            



                              Latin America
                            



                              North America
                            














Search



Region

User













Search







Samples (0)












Home


Personal Care & Cosmetics


Antaron™ V-216 (Ganex™ V-216) polymer
        





    Antaron™ V-216 (Ganex™ V-216) polymer
    


Company:
Ashland


INCI Name:
VP/Hexadecene Copolymer







Documents



Antaron™ V-216 (Ganex™ V-216) polymer Datasheet


Ashland Polymers for Water-Resistant Sun Care and High-Performing Color Cosmetics


Halal Products in Personal Care


Sun Care Technologies- Application Chart


Sun Care Technologies- Overview Guide


Webinar: Sun Care Solutions


Who Gets You Ready for Webcams? We Do.


View All




Formulations


Hydrosheer™ II - In Shower Moisturizer (Formulation #100-10113D)
Second Skin Nourishing Hand Cream (Formulation #100-10166)
Shiny Lipstick (Formulation #300-10005A)
Smoothing Soothing Concealer (Formulation #300-10025)




Ashland makes their documentation available in the regions indicated below:










Antaron™ V-216 is an oil-soluble film former that provides water resistance and wear resistance for sunscreen and color cosmetic formulas. This film former is a liquid which makes it quite versatile and allows for the formulations of products without adding any heat. Antaron™ V-216 polymer is provided under the name of Ganex V-216 polymer in North America.



                Upgrade to Prospector Premium to view Compliance Highlights
                    Learn More

Retailer Compliance Status
No retailer information is available at this time.
Regulatory & Advisory Status
No regulatory information is available at this time.
Compliance information powered by UL's ChemADVISOR™ Regulatory Database.


Company
Who responsibly solves for planet-positive beauty? We do. Natural, nature-derived and biodegradable. This is the foundation for Ashland’s personal care ingredients portfolio because environment, social and governance (ESG), is integrated into everything we do. Our market leading, conscious beauty innovations help ensure our customers meet consumers’ desires for high-performing personal care products aligned with environmentally-friendly and socially responsible principles while still being enjoyable in use. Contact our solvers to learn how we can help you create skin care creams and lotions with more alluring textures using nature-derived thickeners, incorporate sustainable film formers for water resistance in sun care products and cosmetics, effectively protect your formulations from microbial contamination, and discover nature-derived conditioning and styling agents for more natural hair care products, while harnessing the power of nature to find new biofunctional ingredients to help fight the signs of aging and the negative effects that pollution can have on skin and hair. Our research and development teams want to collaborate with you on solutions and products that make the world a more planet-positive, beautiful place.
Company Documents

Ashland Introduces Natural Line for Personal Care Which Includes Hyalurotech™ Sodium Hyaluronate Biosynthesized with Biotechnology
Who Has Responsible Solutions for a Better World? We Do.
Hair Care Product Guide




        The information presented here was acquired by UL from the producer of the product or material or original information provider.  However, UL assumes no responsibility or liability for the accuracy of the information contained on this website and strongly encourages that upon final product or material selection information is validated with the manufacturer.  This website provides links to other websites owned by third parties. The content of such third party sites is not within our control, and we cannot and will not take responsibility for the information or content.
    



Create Your Free Account

Request a sample
                    

Send your request now
        

                    Request pricing or technical help
                

Share:











Categories
Chemical Class Categories

Synthetic Polymers

Functionality Categories

Dispersing Agents
Film Formers
Surfactants ~ Emulsifying Agents



Where to Buy
Ashland

Visit Website


            Are you a distributor who is interested in being listed here? Contact us!
        










×
Premium Compliance Highlights​
Available with a Premium Prospector Account



                        With a Premium Prospector account, view regulatory advisory and retailer compliance on an ingredients level for your material searches.  The full set of lists reviewed have been curated by UL's LOLI Regulatory Database specific for Prospector.  Upgrade today!
                    

A sample of Global Regulatory & Advisory Lists Reviewed:


Prop 65 listings
Canadian Hotlist
Japan Cosmetics Standards
ASEAN and MERCOSUR Cosmetics requirements


A sample of Retailer Compliance Lists Reviewed:


Wal-Mart
Target












×Close

View Compliance Highlights in Prospector​



                            Make smarter decisions with instant access to industry-specific regulatory content when you upgrade to a premium Prospector account. You can also search products with industry certifications like ECOCERT, COSMOS, USDA Organic and more. Try a premium account free for your first month!
                        

View ingredients by Name (CAS Number)
Evaluate selected global regulatory lists including: Prop 65, Canadian Hotlist, Japan Cosmetics Standards and hundreds more​
Identify retailer ingredient restrictions​
View natural and organic certifications of qualified products​


Upgrade To Premium








×Close

ABOUT
Prospector Lists



                        Lists combine the ease of Bookmarks with the versatility of Tags. Instead of one collection of bookmarked items, create as many collections, called "Lists," as you need.
                    
Previous Bookmarks and Tags




                                Find the link to your List page in the user menu.
                            

                            All Tags have been converted to separate Lists, and your bookmarked items have been saved to a "Bookmarks" List.




Adding Items

                        When you click the Add to List button, a dropdown of your existing Lists appears. Click the List name to which you want to add this product or formula.
                    



Create a New List

                        You can also create a new List. Simply click "Create a New List" and enter a name.
                    



Multiple Lists

                        When you define a new List, the current item is automatically added to it. You can add a product or formula to as many Lists as you need.



Explore Your Lists

                        Easily see which Lists this item appears in, and quickly go to that List from the links that appear on the page.



 Back







Next 
Done 


















 About
          

About
Prospector
Contact Us
Advertising Programs
Datasheet Services
Knowledge Center

Data Subject Access Request Portal





 Formulating Materials & Ingredients
          

Formulating Materials & Ingredients
Adhesives & Sealants
Food, Beverage & Nutrition
Graphic Arts & Inks
Household, Industrial & Institutional Cleaners
Lubricant & Metalworking Fluids
Paint & Coatings
Personal Care & Cosmetics




 Solid Materials
          

Solid Materials

Metals
Plastics
Plastics Additives





            UL is a global independent safety science company offering expertise in certification, validation, testing, inspections, auditing, education and advisory services. Our breadth, established objectivity and proven history mean we are a symbol of trust and enable us to help provide peace of mind to all.
          

Learn More





          UL and the UL logo are trademarks of UL LLC ©2023 All Rights Reserved.

          
Terms & Conditions
Privacy Policy
Data Policy









×


We're sorry, but the industry you have selected is not currently available in your chosen language. You may choose a language below to continue to this industry or close this dialog above.

English
Simplified Chinese









GDPR Notice:
Close














  









