Document Name: role of Talcum in Cream3
Document link: https://www.cancer.org/healthy/cancer-causes/chemicals/talcum-powder-and-cancer.html







Talcum Powder and Cancer | American Cancer Society















































Close






*








Close








                            Image  of 


Previous
Next











Skip to Content


















Cancer Helpline


800.227.2345



Contact Us





Sign Up For Email







Español
More Languages


Give In Honor & Memorial
Donate
















Search













Give In Honor & Memorial

Sign Up For Email




Cancer A-Z




Whether you or someone you love has cancer, knowing what to expect can help you cope. Here you'll find in-depth information on specific cancer types – including risk factors, early detection, diagnosis, and treatment options.

Explore Cancer A-Z







Breast Cancer


Colon and Rectal Cancer


Lung Cancer


Prostate Cancer


Skin Cancer


All Cancer Types




Featured Topics


Skin Cancer Gallery


Non-cancerous Breast Conditions


Cancer in Children


Rare Cancers, Sub-types, and Pre-cancers




Related Resources


Cancer Glossary


Cancer News


For Health Care Professionals





















Risk, Prevention, & Screening




You can help reduce your risk of cancer by making healthy choices like eating right, staying active and not smoking. It’s also important to follow recommended screening guidelines, which can help detect certain cancers early.

Explore Risk, Prevention, & Screening







Find Cancer Early


Stay Away From Tobacco


Eat Healthy & Get Active


Be Safe in the Sun


Protect Against HPV


What Causes Cancer?


Cancer Facts




Featured Topics


Screening Guidelines by Age


Genetics & Cancer


Sun Safety Videos


BMI Calculator




Related Resources


Signs & Symptoms of Cancer


Tests to Diagnose Cancer


Cancer Prevention News





















Treatment & Survivorship




Whether you want to learn about treatment options, get advice on coping with side effects, or have questions about health insurance, we’re here to help. 

Explore Treatment & Survivorship







Understanding Your Diagnosis


Treatment & Side Effects


Survivorship


Financial & Insurance Matters


Children & Cancer


For Caregivers & Family


Nearing the End of Life


COVID-19 and Cancer




Featured Topics


Clinical Trials


When Natural Disasters Strike


Personal Health Manager


Caregiver Guide




Related Resources


ACS Bookstore


Cancer Survivors Network


Stories of Hope





















Programs & Services




The American Cancer Society offers programs and services to help you during and after cancer treatment. Below are some of the resources we provide. We can also help you find other free or low-cost resources available.

Explore Programs & Services







Lodging During Treatment


Rides to Treatment




Get Support


Support and Online Communities


Reach To Recovery


Schedule a Video Chat




More Resources


Find a Resource


Hair Loss and Mastectomy Products





















Our Research




What does it take to outsmart cancer? Research. We’ve invested more than $5 billion in cancer research since 1946, all to find more – and better – treatments, uncover factors that may cause cancer, and improve cancer patients’ quality of life.

Explore Our Research







ACS Research Highlights


ACS Research News


Cancer Facts & Figures


CPS-3: Cancer Prevention Study-3


Currently Funded Cancer Research


Apply for a Grant




Life-Saving Research


Research We Fund


Surveillance & Health Equity Science


Population Science


ACS Center for Diversity in Research Training


Our Research Team




Interactive & Multimedia


Cancer Statistics Center


Cancer Atlas


ACS Research Podcasts


ACS Recorded Webinars





















Get Involved




We couldn’t do what we do without our volunteers and donors. Together, we’re making a difference – and you can, too. Become a volunteer, make a tax-deductible donation, or participate in a fundraising event to help us save lives.

Explore Get Involved







Volunteer


Donate


Fundraise


Shop to Save Lives


Sign Up for Email




MORE WAYS TO GET INVOLVED


Plan a Gift


Be An Advocate


Celebrate a Loved One




Our Passion


Volunteer to Help


ACS in Your Community


Cancer News


More Ways to Give





















About Us




At the American Cancer Society, we have a vision to end cancer as we know it, for everyone. We're improving the lives of cancer patients and their families through advocacy, research, and patient support to ensure that everyone has an opportunity to prevent, detect, treat, and survive cancer.

Explore About Us







Who We Are


What We Do


Our Partners


Where We Help


Sign Up for Email




GET TO KNOW US


Our History


Global Cancer Programs


Financials & Governance


Multicultural Communities




MAKING A DIFFERENCE


Careers at ACS


Our Leadership


ACS News Room
























Cancer Helpline



800.227.2345




                                       Contact Us
                                    




Español
More Languages

















Search













Search

















|


Download this topic [PDF]














Chemicals and Cancer



Acrylamide


Agent Orange


Antiperspirants


Arsenic


Asbestos


Aspartame


Benzene


Cosmetics


Diesel Exhaust


Firefighting


Formaldehyde


Hair Dyes


Military Burn Pits


Recombinant Bovine Growth Hormone


Perfluorooctanoic Acid (PFOA), Perfluorooctane Sulfonate (PFOS), and Related Chemicals


Talcum Powder


Water Fluoridation











Home

Risk, Prevention, & Screening

What Causes Cancer?

Chemicals and Cancer







Talcum Powder and Cancer






What is talcum powder?
Talcum powder is made from talc. Talc is a mineral made up mainly of magnesium, silicon, and oxygen. As a powder, it absorbs moisture well and helps cut down on friction, making it useful for keeping skin dry and helping prevent rashes. It is widely used in cosmetic products such as baby powder and adult body and facial powders, as well as in a number of other consumer products.
Talc is mined from the earth. In this natural form, some talc contains asbestos, a substance known to cause cancers in and around the lungs when inhaled (see Asbestos).
In 1976, the Cosmetic, Toiletry, and Fragrances Association (CTFA), the trade association representing the cosmetic and personal care products industry, issued voluntary guidelines stating that all talc used in cosmetic products in the United States should be free from detectable amounts of asbestos according to their standards.
   
Most concerns about a possible link between talcum powder and cancer have focused on:

If people who have long-term exposure to talc particles at work, such as talc miners, are at higher risk of lung cancer from breathing them in.
If talcum powder applied regularly in the genital area increases the risk of ovarian cancer.

Does talcum powder cause cancer?
When talking about whether talcum powder is linked to cancer, it is important to distinguish between talc that contains asbestos and talc that is asbestos-free. Talc that has asbestos is generally accepted as being able to cause cancer if it is inhaled. The evidence about asbestos-free talc is less clear.
Researchers use 2 main types of studies to try to figure out if a substance or exposure causes cancer.
Lab studies: In studies done in the lab, animals are exposed to a substance (often in very large doses) to see if it causes tumors or other health problems. Researchers might also expose normal cells in a lab dish to the substance to see if it causes the types of genetic changes that are seen in cancer cells. It’s not always clear if the results from lab studies will apply to humans, but they are a good way to find out if a substance might possibly cause cancer.
Studies in people: Other studies look at cancer risks among different groups of people. Such studies might compare the cancer risk in a group exposed to a substance to the risk in a group not exposed to it, or compare it to what would be expected in the general population. But sometimes it can be hard to know what the results of these studies mean, because many other factors might affect the results.
In most cases neither type of study provides enough evidence on its own, so researchers usually look at both lab-based and human studies when trying to figure out if something causes cancer.
Studies in the lab
Studies that exposed lab animals (rats, mice, and hamsters) to asbestos-free talc in various ways have had mixed results, with some showing tumor formation and others not finding any.
Studies in people
Ovarian cancer
It has been suggested that talcum powder might cause cancer in the ovaries if the powder particles (applied to the genital area or on sanitary napkins, diaphragms, or condoms) were to travel through the vagina, uterus, and fallopian tubes to the ovaries.
Many studies in women have looked at the possible link between talcum powder and ovarian cancer. Findings have been mixed, with some studies reporting a slightly increased risk and some reporting no increase.

Many case-control studies have found a small increase in risk.
     But these types of studies can be biased because they often rely on a person’s memory of talc use many years earlier.  
Prospective cohort studies, which would not have the same type of potential bias, have generally not found a significant increase in ovarian cancer risk overall. However, some have suggested possible increased risks in certain groups of women (for example, in women who still have an intact reproductive tract)
     or in certain types of ovarian cancer.
    

One of the problems with studying this issue is that ovarian cancer isn’t common. Because of this, even the largest studies done so far might not have been big enough to detect a very small increase in risk, if it exists.
Researchers have tried to address this by combining the results of different studies (known as a meta-analysis), but even this type of research has had mixed results. For example, in an analysis combining the results of the major cohort studies there was no overall increased risk of ovarian cancer,
     while in an analysis of both case-control and cohort studies, frequent talcum powder use (defined as at least twice a week) was linked with an increased risk.
    
For any individual woman, if there is an increased risk, the overall increase is likely to very be small. Still, talc is widely used in many products, so it is important to determine if the increased risk is real. Research in this area continues.
Lung cancer
Some studies of talc miners and millers have suggested an increased risk of lung cancer and other respiratory diseases, while others have found no increase in lung cancer risk. These studies have been complicated by the fact that in its natural form, talc can contain varying amounts of asbestos and other minerals, unlike the purified talc in consumer products. When working underground, miners can also be exposed to other substances that might affect lung cancer risk, such as radon. Other lung cancer risk factors, such as smoking, also need to be taken into account.
No increased risk of lung cancer has been reported with the use of cosmetic talcum powder.
Other cancers
Talc use has not been strongly linked to other cancers, although not all possible links with other cancers have been studied extensively.
One study suggested genital talcum powder use may slightly increase the risk of endometrial (uterine) cancer in women who are past menopause.
    But other studies have not found such a link.
    Further studies are needed to explore this topic.
Some limited research has also looked at a possible link between inhaled talc exposure at work and other cancers, such as stomach cancer and pleural mesothelioma (cancer of the lining that surrounds the lungs). But there is no strong evidence of such links at this time.
What expert agencies say
Several national and international agencies study substances in the environment to determine if they can cause cancer. (A substance that causes cancer or helps cancer grow is called a carcinogen.) The American Cancer Society looks to these organizations to evaluate the risks based on evidence from laboratory, animal, and human research studies.
The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) is part of the World Health Organization (WHO). One of its major goals is to identify causes of cancer.

IARC classifies talc that contains asbestos as “carcinogenic to humans.”
Based on the lack of data from human studies and on limited data in lab animal studies, IARC classifies inhaled talc not containing asbestos as “not classifiable as to carcinogenicity in humans.”
Based on limited evidence from human studies of a link to ovarian cancer, IARC classifies the perineal (genital) use of talc-based body powder as “possibly carcinogenic to humans.”

The US National Toxicology Program (NTP) is an interagency program of several different government agencies, including the National Institutes of Health (NIH), the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The NTP has not fully reviewed talc (with or without asbestos) as a possible carcinogen.
(For more information on the classification systems these agencies use, see Determining if Something Is a Carcinogen and Known and Probable Human Carcinogens.)
Can I avoid or limit my exposure to talcum powder?
Studies of personal use of talcum powder have had mixed results, although there is some suggestion of a possible increase in ovarian cancer risk. There is very little evidence at this time that any other forms of cancer are linked with consumer use of talcum powder.
Until more information is available, people who are concerned about possible links between talcum powder and cancer may choose to avoid or limit their use of consumer products that contain it.






Written by


References























The American Cancer Society medical and editorial content team

Our team is made up of doctors and oncology certified nurses with deep knowledge of cancer care as well as journalists, editors, and translators with extensive experience in medical writing.


















Berge W, Mundt K, Luu H, et al. Genital use of talc and risk of ovarian cancer: A meta analysis. Eur J Cancer Prev. 2018;27(3):248-257.
Ciocan C, Godono A, Stefanin S, et al. Risk of mortality from respiratory malignant and non-malignant diseases among talc miners and millers: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Toxics. 2022; 10(10):589.
Coggiola M, Bosio D, Pira E, et al. An update of a mortality study of talc miners and millers in Italy. Am J Ind Med. 2003;44:63−69.
Cook LS, Kamb ML, Weiss NS. Perineal powder exposure and the risk of ovarian cancer. Am J Epidemiol.1997;145:459−465.
Crawford L, Reeves KW, Luisi N, Balasubramanian R, Sturgeon SR. Perineal powder use and risk of endometrial cancer in postmenopausal women. Cancer Causes Control. 2012;23:1673−1680.
Cramer DW, Vitonis AF, Terry KL, et al. The association between talc use and ovarian cancer: a retrospective case control study in two US states. Epidemiology. 2016;27:334-46
Gertig DM, Hunter DJ, Cramer DW, et al. Prospective study of talc use and ovarian cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2000;92:249−252.
Hartge P, Stewart PA. Occupation and ovarian cancer: A case-control study in the Washington DC metropolitan area, 1978-1981. J Occup Med. 1994;36:924−927.
Honda Y, Beall C, Delzell E, et al. Mortality among workers at a talc mining and milling facility. Ann Occup Hyg. 2002;46:575−585.
Houghton SC, Reeves KW, Hankinson SE, et al. Perineal powder use and risk of ovarian cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2014 Sep 10;106(9).
International Agency for Research on Cancer. IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans. Volume 93. Carbon Black, Titanium Dioxide, Talc. 2010. Accessed at: https://publications.iarc.fr/111 on December 5, 2022.
Karageorgi S, Gates MA, Hankinson SE, De Vivo I. Perineal use of talcum powder and endometrial cancer risk. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2010;19:1269−1275.
Lynch HN, Lauer DJ, Thompson WJ, et al. Systematic review of the scientific evidence of the pulmonary carcinogenicity of talc. Front Public Health. 2022:10:989111.
Mills PK, Riordan DG, Cress RD, Young HA. Perineal talc exposure and epithelial ovarian cancer risk in the Central Valley of California. Int J Cancer. 2004;112:458−464.
Neill AS, Nagle CM, Spurdle AB, Webb PM. Use of talcum powder and endometrial cancer risk. Cancer Causes Control. 2012;2:513−519.
O'Brien KM, Tworoger SS, Harris HR, et al. Association of powder use in the genital area with risk of ovarian cancer. JAMA. 2020;323(1):49-59.
Rosenblatt KA, Weiss NS, Cushing-Haugen KL, Wicklund KG, Rossing MA. Genital powder exposure and the risk of epithelial ovarian cancer. Cancer Causes Control. 2011;22:737−742.
Terry KL, Karageorgi S, Shvetsov YB, et al. Genital powder use and risk of ovarian cancer: A pooled analysis of 8,525 cases and 9,859 controls. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2013;6:811–821.
Thomas TL, Stewart PA. Mortality from lung cancer and respiratory disease among pottery workers exposed to silica and talc. Am J Epidemiol. 1987;125:35−43.
US Department of Health and Human Services. Public Health Service, National Toxicology Program. Report on Carcinogens, Fifteenth Edition. 2021. Accessed at https://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/whatwestudy/assessments/cancer/roc/index.html on December 5, 2022.
Woolen SA, Lazar AA, Smith-Bindman R. Association between the frequent use of perineal talcum powder products and ovarian cancer: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J Gen Intern Med. 2022;37:2526–2532.
 










Written by

















The American Cancer Society medical and editorial content team

Our team is made up of doctors and oncology certified nurses with deep knowledge of cancer care as well as journalists, editors, and translators with extensive experience in medical writing.












References






Berge W, Mundt K, Luu H, et al. Genital use of talc and risk of ovarian cancer: A meta analysis. Eur J Cancer Prev. 2018;27(3):248-257.
Ciocan C, Godono A, Stefanin S, et al. Risk of mortality from respiratory malignant and non-malignant diseases among talc miners and millers: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Toxics. 2022; 10(10):589.
Coggiola M, Bosio D, Pira E, et al. An update of a mortality study of talc miners and millers in Italy. Am J Ind Med. 2003;44:63−69.
Cook LS, Kamb ML, Weiss NS. Perineal powder exposure and the risk of ovarian cancer. Am J Epidemiol.1997;145:459−465.
Crawford L, Reeves KW, Luisi N, Balasubramanian R, Sturgeon SR. Perineal powder use and risk of endometrial cancer in postmenopausal women. Cancer Causes Control. 2012;23:1673−1680.
Cramer DW, Vitonis AF, Terry KL, et al. The association between talc use and ovarian cancer: a retrospective case control study in two US states. Epidemiology. 2016;27:334-46
Gertig DM, Hunter DJ, Cramer DW, et al. Prospective study of talc use and ovarian cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2000;92:249−252.
Hartge P, Stewart PA. Occupation and ovarian cancer: A case-control study in the Washington DC metropolitan area, 1978-1981. J Occup Med. 1994;36:924−927.
Honda Y, Beall C, Delzell E, et al. Mortality among workers at a talc mining and milling facility. Ann Occup Hyg. 2002;46:575−585.
Houghton SC, Reeves KW, Hankinson SE, et al. Perineal powder use and risk of ovarian cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2014 Sep 10;106(9).
International Agency for Research on Cancer. IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans. Volume 93. Carbon Black, Titanium Dioxide, Talc. 2010. Accessed at: https://publications.iarc.fr/111 on December 5, 2022.
Karageorgi S, Gates MA, Hankinson SE, De Vivo I. Perineal use of talcum powder and endometrial cancer risk. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2010;19:1269−1275.
Lynch HN, Lauer DJ, Thompson WJ, et al. Systematic review of the scientific evidence of the pulmonary carcinogenicity of talc. Front Public Health. 2022:10:989111.
Mills PK, Riordan DG, Cress RD, Young HA. Perineal talc exposure and epithelial ovarian cancer risk in the Central Valley of California. Int J Cancer. 2004;112:458−464.
Neill AS, Nagle CM, Spurdle AB, Webb PM. Use of talcum powder and endometrial cancer risk. Cancer Causes Control. 2012;2:513−519.
O'Brien KM, Tworoger SS, Harris HR, et al. Association of powder use in the genital area with risk of ovarian cancer. JAMA. 2020;323(1):49-59.
Rosenblatt KA, Weiss NS, Cushing-Haugen KL, Wicklund KG, Rossing MA. Genital powder exposure and the risk of epithelial ovarian cancer. Cancer Causes Control. 2011;22:737−742.
Terry KL, Karageorgi S, Shvetsov YB, et al. Genital powder use and risk of ovarian cancer: A pooled analysis of 8,525 cases and 9,859 controls. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2013;6:811–821.
Thomas TL, Stewart PA. Mortality from lung cancer and respiratory disease among pottery workers exposed to silica and talc. Am J Epidemiol. 1987;125:35−43.
US Department of Health and Human Services. Public Health Service, National Toxicology Program. Report on Carcinogens, Fifteenth Edition. 2021. Accessed at https://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/whatwestudy/assessments/cancer/roc/index.html on December 5, 2022.
Woolen SA, Lazar AA, Smith-Bindman R. Association between the frequent use of perineal talcum powder products and ovarian cancer: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J Gen Intern Med. 2022;37:2526–2532.
 









 Last Revised: December 6, 2022

 
 
 








American Cancer Society medical information is copyrighted material. For reprint requests, please see our Content Usage Policy.















































Help us end cancer as we know it, for everyone.

DONATE









Cancer Information



Cancer Prevention & Detection




Cancer Basics




Signs & Symptoms of Cancer




Treatments & Side Effects




ACS Research Highlights




Cancer Facts & Statistics




News and Stories




Glossary




For Health Care Professionals








Programs & Services



Lodging During Treatment




Rides To Treatment




Breast Cancer Support




Hair Loss and Mastectomy Products




Connecting Cancer Survivors








ACS FUNDRAISERS



Making Strides Against Breast Cancer Walks




Relay For Life Events




American Cancer Society on Campus




Coaches vs. Cancer




Galas, Balls & Parties




Ways to Give




Memorial Giving




Planned Giving




Philanthropy




Donate a Car




Coupons That Give








About ACS



Contact Us




ACS in Your Community




Employment




Information for Suppliers




Report Fraud or Abuse




Sign Up for Email




Our Research




Cancer Action Network




Global Health




Policies




Our Volunteers








More ACS Sites



Bookstore




Cancer Atlas




Cancer Statistics Center




ACS News Room




Volunteer Community
















Follow Us











Cancer Information, Answers, and Hope. Available Every Minute of Every Day.


800.227.2345


Follow Us















                                        Help
                                    



                                        Site map
                                    



                                        Privacy policy
                                    



                                        Privacy rights
                                    



                                        Accessibility
                                    



                                        Terms of use
                                    



                                        State fundraising notices
                                    



                                    Site Comments
                                





© 2023 American Cancer Society, Inc. All rights reserved. The American Cancer Society is a qualified 501(c)(3) tax-exempt organization. Tax ID Number: 13-1788491. Cancer.org is provided courtesy of the Leo and Gloria Rosen family.


















BackTo Top









