Document Name: role of Glycol Stearate in Massage Cream2
Document link: https://www.soothingtouch.com/balancing-cream.html
   Balancing Cream 




      

  
                              ACCOUNT CONTACT MY CART                

New Basics+ Massage Oils

             0              Contact Us|  My Orders|  My Account    0 Shopping Cart      Shopping Cart  Your cart is currently empty.           Shop     Massage & Spa   Hand Sanitizer   Herbal Freeze   Basics+ Oil Blends   Basics Products   Creams   Lotions   Oils   Gels   Sugar Scrubs   Salt Scrubs   Pain Relief   Essential Oils   Massage Kits   CBD Herbal Therapy   Educational Use Products     Bath & Beauty   Hand Sanitizer   Hand & Body Soap   CBD Herbal Therapy   Ayurveda Body Lotions   Bath & Body Oils   Bath Salts   Body Butter   Sugar Scrubs   Salt Scrubs   Essential Oils   Lip Balm - Vegan/Organic   Massage Lotions   Massage Oils   Massage Creams   Pain Relief     Sale   EDLP     New   Vegan   Unscented   Resources                  Home/ Massage and Spa/ Creams/ Balancing Massage Cream                Balancing Massage Cream 350131-21-CE013  $10.99           Login to review this product  You May Also Like        Ylang Ylang Essential Oil $19.99         Calming Massage Cream $10.99         Muscle Comfort Massage Cream $10.99         Therapeutic Massage Oil $31.99                           Size:  13.2 oz.        62 oz.        1 Gallon        5 Gallon        13.2 oz. Case (6)   62 oz. Case (4)   1 Gallon Case (4)                                  Product Details Bring harmony to the elements of the body with Soothing Touch Balancing Cream. This all-purpose, unscented cream is Ayurvedically formulated to balance the Fire and Ether elements in the body. Infused with the harmonizing elements of Chamomile, Comfrey, Arnica, Ginger and Gotu Kola this cream brings balance to the body and mind and is an ideal all-round unscented massage choice.
Notice: The 13.2 and 62 oz sizes are non-pumpable, slightly thicker constancy. The gallon and 5-gallon sizes are pumpable, slightly thinner consistency. The gallon size comes with a pump.DirectionsMassage a moderate amount of cream into the skin, use as often as desired on the entire body and face.Ingredients:Filtered Water, Octyl Palmitate, Sunflower (Helianthus annuus) Oil, Canola Seed (Brassica napus) Oil, Cetyl Alcohol, Propylene Glycol, Stearic Acid, Sorbic Acid (and) Phenoxyethanol (and) Caprylyl Glycol, Triethanolamine, Glyceryl Stearate and PEG 100 Stearate, Allantoin, Chamomile (Chamomilla recutita) Extract, Sweet Almond (Prunus amygdalus dulcis) Oil, Sesame (Sesamum indicum) Oil, Basil (Ocimum basillicum) Essential Oil, Sage (Salvia officinalis) Essential Oil, Castor (Ricinus communis) Oil, Ginger (Zingiber officinale) Essential Oil, Natural Sandalwood Fragrance, Calendula (Calendula officinalis) Oil, Arnica (Arnica cordifolia) Extract, St. John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum) Extract, Gotu Kola (Centella asiatica) Extract, Valerian (Valeriana officinalis) Root Extract, Natural Vitamin E (Tocopherol), Aloe Vera (Aloe barbadensis) Gel. CautionsFor External Use Only Please consult your doctor before using any Soothing Touch product. Read more about the ingredients we use. Primary Safety Data Sheet:  View Balancing Massage Cream (Small Sizes) Safety Data Sheet                                  Categories  Massage and Spa CBD Herbal Therapy Herbal Freeze Basics+ Oil Blends Basics Products Creams Lotions Oils Massage Gel Sugar Scrubs Salt Scrubs Pain Relief Essential Oils Massage Kits Gift Sets Bath and Beauty Sale Items What's New Clearance Vegan Products Organic Products Unscented Products Pumps & Bottles Promoted Items >> Resource Center << >> Reviews << Cases Eaches                   Subscribe to receive promotions and product updates. Newsletter Signup         

MADE IN THE USA    •    PHTHALATE FREE    •    PARABEN FREE    •    CRUELTY FREE    •    FAMILY OWNED

        Our Story 
We are a family owned manufacturer of products for the massage, spa, beauty, home, natural foods, and health and beauty markets. We began very humbly in 1977 in Los Angeles, CA in a garage with a few Ayurvedic oil formulas from India, shared by the late teacher Yogi Bhajan. We now manufacturer in Santa Fe, NM and have expanded to offer over 200 items to customers around the world. All of our products are cruelty free and Made in the USA.

  Shop 
Massage & Spa
Bath & Beauty
Accessories
Sale Items
What's New
Clearance
Vegan Products
Made with Organic Ingredients
Unscented Products
Every Day Low Price

  Support   Contact Us Order Status Frequently Asked Questions Shipping and Return Policies About Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use     Contact  Contact Customer Service 35 Bisbee CtSanta Fe, New Mexico 87508  Connect With Us               Copyright © 2023 Soothing Touch.Statements on this website have not been evaluated by the FDA. These products and this information is not intended to diagnose, treat, cure, or prevent any disease.     HOME SHOP CART HELP    LINKS×  Contact Us Order Status Frequently Asked Questions Shipping and Return Policies About Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use            

             