Document Name: role of Water in Cold Cream2
Document link: https://www.behindthescenesmakeup.com/reviews/review-jergens-all-purpose-face-cream/













Jergens All Purpose Face Cream // Review of the Timeless Cold Cream




























































 
Reviews
Beauty Inspo

Runway
Editorial


Beauty Tips and Tricks
|   About
Contact









Reviews
Beauty Inspo

Runway
Editorial


Beauty Tips and Tricks
|   About
Contact








 







 













Home
HP Jergens All Purpose Face Cream // Review of the Timeless Cold Cream





This site receives a small commission for purchases made via affiliate links.



HPReviews
Jergens All Purpose Face Cream // Review of the Timeless Cold Cream

by Lindsey
July 21, 2019 

written by Lindsey



 
 


As a professional makeup artist, I work with people of all ages, races and skin types. If someone sits down in my chair with good skin, I will grill them on all of the details of their diet and skincare routine so that I can copy their secrets. 
Over the years of discussing skincare with countless numbers of people, I have noticed a trend in my more mature clients. They all have the least complicated skin care routines, ever. Just throw some Dove bar soap on your face and call it a day (I’ve actually gotten this answer a few times!).
About 10 years ago, an older actress turned me onto Jergens All Purpose Face Cream. Her skin was immaculate and she swore by this product. Naturally, I stopped by the drugstore on my way home and bought a jar for myself.
Keep reading for an in-depth review of the Jergens All Purpose Face Cream. Discover what it is, how to use it and if it works as well as people claim. 
(THIS POST IS MISSING PHOTOS. I wrote this post 10 years ago (!) and it has recently been updated. I am currently working on retaking my photos so I apologize for the stock photos in the meantime. Thank you for your patience.) 
JERGENS ALL PURPOSE FACE CREAM REVIEW
WHAT IS JERGENS ALL PURPOSE FACE CREAM
Jergens All Purpose Face Cream is said to deep cleanse and remove makeup and dirt while providing a radiant and dewey base for makeup. It claims to soften and moisturize skin while preventing dryness. 
If you can’t tell by its dated packaging, this product is vintage AF. It’s basically an old fashioned cold cream and it comes with a devout following. Some fans have even been using it since the 50’s! 
Check out this cute review on Amazon: 

The nature of cold creams is to moisturize, and since none of the ingredients are small enough to absorb into the skin, it almost acts as a mask,  providing an outer moisture barrier. While cold creams don’t necessarily hydrate, they do make your skin super soft and are effective for those with dry skin. 
JERGENS ALL PURPOSE FACE CREAM REVIEW
HOW TO USE JERGENS ALL PURPOSE FACE CREAM
Apply the Jergens cream liberally onto your entire face, massaging it into your skin as you go. Wait 30 seconds and then remove it with a tissue or a warm washcloth. If your skin is extra dry, you can even leave it on overnight.. just be sure to cover your pillowcase or it’ll be a greasy mess in the morning.
This product is best for those with dry skin. It’s very thick and greasy, making it difficult to wash off. Water just beads off the top layer.
I have never had the courage to slather it over my whole face, I feel like that would be way too heavy for my skin. Instead, I preferred to use it as an eye makeup remover. 
AN UNEXPECTED AND EFFICIENT MAKEUP REMOVER
While there are multiple uses for the Jergens All Purpose Face Cream, I used it mainly for removing my eye makeup… to which it did an excellent job.
I would rub a cotton pad into the cream and swipe it across my eyelids after I was done washing my face. This stuff could remove even the most waterproof of mascaras.
I try not to pull or rub the delicate skin around my eyes and because this cream is so effective at removing makeup, 1 or 2 swipes were all I needed for it to completely remove all traces of makeup.
Also, because of the thick consistency of the product, it also doubles as an eye cream. Win, win.

RELATED POST: BIODERMA CREALINE // MY HOLY GRAIL MAKEUP REMOVER 

OTHER USES 
After looking through some reviews, many claim to use this product on their whole body to combat dryness, while others even use it as a shaving cream. 
Jergens claims that the cream can double as a makeup primer but it doesn’t make sense how a product can be advertised as a makeup remover and a makeup primer at the same time.
So, I don’t advise people to use it as a primer. It is way too greasy to sit under makeup properly and it will probably start to break it down.
THE PRICE
One of the best things about this cream is the price. You can purchase it for under $4 at most drugstores or big box retailers like Target or Wal-Mart.
FOUR DOLLARS.
Not only that but one jar will literally last you forever. Each jar is 15oz and my last one needed to be replaced because I had hit the expiration date before I was done using it… and that was with daily use.
If you’re looking for a budget cold cream or a cheap makeup remover, you can’t really beat this one.
TO PURCHASE JERGENS ALL PURPOSE FACE CREAM CLICK HERE 



I JUST WISH THERE WAS MORE TO IT..
I used Jergens All Purpose Face Cream as my daily makeup remover for about 10 years. I swore I would never use anything else and then one day I looked at the ingredients and wondered if this was actually doing anything for my skin.
THE INGREDIENTS 
Like most cold creams, this product is mainly comprised of oil, water and wax. 
Jergens All Purpose Face Cream’s oil of choice is mineral oil. Mineral oil acts as a skin conditioning agent but it is a slightly controversial ingredient that some people skin care experts recommend avoiding. For more information to make an educated decision for yourself,  here is a link to an article that says mineral oil is good for the skin, and here is a link to one that recommends against it.
For wax, they use Beeswax which creates a barrier to seal moisture into the skin.
Other than that, you’ll also find:

Magnesium Aluminum Silicate which is a thickener/filler.
Sodium Borate which is used to kill bacteria and prevent cosmetics from spoiling.
DMDM Hydantoin which is also used a preservative to prevent spoilage.
Isopropyl Myristate which is an emollient.
Fragrance
Red Dye

And that’s it.
With all of the recent skin technologies coming out, this product and its ingredients feel a little dated.
I believe I can find products that have more long term benefits for my skin so I have ultimately decided to move on my All Purpose Face Cream. 

INGREDIENTS Mineral Oil, Water, Beeswax, Magnesium Aluminum Silicate, Sodium Borate, Fragrance, Isopropyl Myristate, DMDM Hydantoin, Red 4

IS JERGENS ALL PURPOSE FACE CREAM CRUELTY FREE?
NO. Jergens is not cruelty free and they do test on animals.
HAVE YOU TRIED JERGENS ALL PURPOSE FACE CREAM? LET ME KNOW YOUR THOUGHTS IN THE COMMENTS! 

PIN IT: JERGENS ALL PURPOSE FACE CREAM REVIEW // AN UNEXPECTED AND EFFICIENT MAKEUP REMOVER
DISCLAIMER: This review is not sponsored. This post contains affiliate links which means if you click them and purchase something, I receive a small commission. 






5 comments

1 FacebookTwitterPinterestEmail 



 

Lindsey
I am a freelance makeup artist in Los Angeles working mainly in print and television. Makeup and traveling are my passion and my heart resides at La Isla De Los Monos Monkey Rescue Center in the Peruvian Amazon.







previous post



Eyeko Mascara Review // LASH ALERT







next post



GHD Flat Iron Review // The Straightener That Has Lasted 10+ Years






You may also like




Embryolisse Lait Creme Concentre Review // A Cult...




L’Oreal Voluminous Mascara Review // The Drugstore Mascara...




Maybelline Fit Me Foundation Review // Matte +...




Neocell Super Collagen Powder Review // Does it...




Tan Towel Review // Convenient and Travel Friendly...




GHD Flat Iron Review // The Straightener That...




Eyeko Mascara Review // LASH ALERT




The 30 Best Halloween Eyelashes to Elevate Any...




The Best Lancome Products // 4 Bestsellers To...




What to Expect at the Makeup Show LA...



5 comments 




 

FUNMI IYANDA
October 6, 2010 - 8:41 am
i have a oily skin as a matter of fact i have tried all i could to eradicate the oily skin especially on my face, because when i apply my make up in the morning before 2hrs my face is already oily and the make up is so bad, im using jergens ultra healing but its not working. What should i do because im tired.


Reply 







 

Lindsey
October 8, 2010 - 4:23 pm
Hi Funmi!
For oily skin I recommend using a good primer before you apply your makeup. This will help your makeup stick and last longer. Also, Jergens ultra healing (as far as I know) is not meant for your face and is probably why you are having problems with oil. Try using an actual facial moisturizer. Embroylisse has one that mattifies the skin called Emulsion Hydra-Mat, which would be perfect for your circumstance. Good luck!


Reply 









 

Carr
February 17, 2017 - 8:43 pm
Why did you list mineral oil as a con?


Reply 







 

Lindsey
February 20, 2017 - 9:57 am
Hi Carr,
Mineral oil is derived from petroleum and is considered comedogenic. There are many people who actively avoid using products containing mineral oil, so I like to let my readers know if certain products contain it 🙂


Reply 









 

donna
November 11, 2019 - 5:34 am
hi,
i like the jergens face cream.  i used to have very oily skin until i went on cholesterol meds which seemed to have sucked the oil out of me.  numbers went down so that was ok.  i had a jar of jergens in the cabinet and i am enjoying using it since the weather is colder and more drying to the skin.  i feel it makes my skin look more youthful.  i did not know that mineral oil removes blackheads and cleans pores! i hope so.  i am watching to see if that happens for me.
just a thought, i believe you can use this as a makeup primer and remover due to the order of usage.  makeup on top of the cream for priming, is different from cream on top of makeup for removal.  i hope that makes sense. lol
 i would like to enjoy a nicer clean scent with this cream.  someone mentioned that it smells like roses.  i think that might be it.  i stuck my nose in to take a whiff…. i love to ask lovely older women who still have beautiful skin, what they have always used on their skin…most would say they have used cold cream since they were young….nothing too fancy and expensive or time consuming…. i hope jergens stays as a winner!   i wish it had the same scent as their vintage hand cream and bar soap has/had… cherry -almond is delish….. well, so long…;


Reply 



 
Leave a Comment


Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

Δ 
 
 






Follow my Travels  



 










Twitter
Instagram
Pinterest




@2020 - All Right Reserved. Behind the Scenes Makeup 


We are participants in the Amazon Services LLC Associates Program.  As an Amazon Associate we earn from qualifying purchases.









				This website uses cookies to improve your experience. We'll assume you're ok with this, but you can opt-out if you wish.				Accept Read More 













