Document Name: role of Isopropyl stearate in Make up Cream4
Document link: https://www.cosmeticsinfo.org/ingredients/isopropyl-stearate/









Isopropyl Stearate - Cosmetics Info








































 










Skip to content










THE SCIENCE & SAFETY BEHIND YOUR FAVORITE PRODUCTS                        



Safety Basics 
What’s In My Products 
Get the Facts 
Regulation & Oversight 
About Us 
Multimedia 











Find An Ingredient






















ProductsWhat’s In My Products

Shelf Life
Baby

Baby Lotions, Oils, Powders and Creams
Baby Shampoos


Bath

Bath Capsules, Oils, Tablets and Salts
Bubble Baths


Eye Makeup

Eyeliner
Eye Color
Eye Makeup Remover
Eyebrow Pencil
Mascara


Facial Makeup

Cheek Color
Concealers
Face Powders
Foundations
Lip Color


Fragrance

Colognes, Perfumes, and Fragrance Mists
Dusting Powders or Body Powders


Hair Care

Hair Conditioners
Hair Sprays
Hair Straighteners and Relaxers
Permanent Waves
Shampoos and Rinses
Tonics and Dressings


Hair Dye and Hair Coloring

Hair Bleaches
Hair Dyes and Colors
Hair Tints, Rinses and Shampoos


Nail

Artificial Nail Extension Products
Cuticle Oils, Creams and Lotions
Manicure and Pedicure Products
Nail Polish and Enamel and Removers


Oral Care

Mouthwashes and Breath Fresheners
Toothpastes


Personal Cleanliness

Antiperspirants and Deodorants
Douches
Feminine Deodorants
Soap


Shaving

Aftershave Lotion
Preshave Lotions (all types)
Shaving Creams
Shaving Soap


Skin Care

Body and Hand Creams and Lotions
Cleansers
Face and Neck Creams/Lotions
Foot Powders and Sprays
Moisturizers


Sunscreens and Sunless Tanners

Sunless Tanners
Sunscreen Frequently Asked Questions
Sunscreens: How to Read a Label, Expert Tips, etc.










Isopropyl Stearate
SHARE THIS


Overview
Safety
Resources



What Is It?
The stearate esters (Butyl Stearate, Cetyl Stearate, Isocetyl Stearate, Isopropyl Stearate, Myristyl Stearate, Ethylhexyl Stearate, Isobutyl Stearate) are oily liquids or waxy solids. Ethylhexyl Stearate may also be called Octyl Stearate. In cosmetics and personal care products, stearate esters are used most frequently in the formulation of eye makeup, skin makeup, lipstick and skin care products.
Why is it used in cosmetics and personal care products?
Stearate esters act primarily as lubricants on the skin’s surface, which gives the skin a soft and smooth appearance. Butyl Stearate also decreases the thickness of lipsticks, thereby lessening the drag on lips, and imparts water repelling characteristics to nail polishes. Butyl Stearate and Isopropyl Stearate dry to form a thin coating on the skin. Isocetyl Stearate can also be used to dissolve other substances, usually liquids.

Scientific Facts:
The stearate esters are prepared by reacting stearic acid with the appropriate alcohol (butyl, cetyl, isobutyl, isocetyl, isopropyl, myristyl or ethylhexyl alcohol). Stearate esters have the unique properties of low viscosity and an oily nature, which results in a nongreasy, hydrophobic film when applied to the skin or lips. Stearic acid is found in animal and vegetable fats.



Safety Information:
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) includes Butyl Stearate on its list as a flavoring agent allowed to be directly added to food. Butyl Stearate is also as an approved indirect food additive and can be used as a component of adhesives. The safety of the stearate ester ingredients has been assessed by the Cosmetic Ingredient Review (CIR) Expert Panel. The CIR Expert Panel evaluated scientific data and concluded that Butyl, Cetyl, Isobutyl, Isocetyl, Isopropyl, Myristyl and Ethylhexyl Stearate were safe as cosmetic ingredients. In 2003, as part of the scheduled re-evaluation of ingredients, the CIR Expert Panel considered available new data on the stearate esters and reaffirmed the above conclusion.
More safety Information:
CIR Safety Review: The CIR Expert Panel noted that the safety of the stearate esters has been assessed in a number of studies. They had low acute oral toxicity and were essentially nonirritating to the eyes when tested at and above use concentrations. At cosmetic use concentrations, the stearate esters were, at most, minimally irritating to skin. In clinical studies, the stearate esters and cosmetics and personal care products containing them, were at most minimally to mildly irritating, essentially nonsensitizing, nonphototoxic and nonphotosensitizing.
The CIR Expert Panel indicated that comedogenicity should be considered when using the stearate ester ingredients in cosmetic formulations.
Link to FDA Code of Federal Regulations for Butyl Stearate

http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm?fr…
http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm?fr…

If they are derived from plants, the stearate esters may be used in cosmetics and personal care products marketed in Europe according to the general provisions of the Cosmetics Regulation of the European Union.
Ingredients of animal origin must comply with European Union animal by-products regulations.
Link to the EU Cosmetic Regulation:http://europa.eu/legislation_summaries/consumers/product_labelling_and_p…
The Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives has not allocated an Acceptable Daily Intake for Butyl Stearate. The Committee believes no safety concern is present at current levels of intake when Butyl Stearate is used as a flavoring agent.http://www.inchem.org/documents/jecfa/jeceval/jec_288.htm

More Scientific Information:
The stearate esters are esters of stearic acid and an alcohol. Due to the grade of stearic acid and the alcohols used as starting materials, the commercially available stearate esters are often mixtures of various esters. The name indicates the ester at the highest concentration. In cosmetics and personal care products, the stearate esters function mainly as skin conditioning agents – emollients. Butyl Stearate also functions in lipsticks as a viscosity decreasing agent and a color-suspending agent. In nail polishes, Butyl Stearate may be used as a water-repelling plasticizer. In hand creams and lotions, Butyl and Isopropyl Stearate function as spreading agents. Isopropyl Stearate also serves to increase the gelatin characteristics of hand product formulations. Isocetyl Stearate is used in cosmetics and personal care products as a lubricant and solvent.



Resources:
Find out more about the regulation of Food Additives by the Food and Drug Administration
Food Ingredients and Packaging: http://www.fda.gov/Food/IngredientsPackagingLabeling/default.htm
Food Contact Substances: http://www.fda.gov/Food/IngredientsPackagingLabeling/PackagingFCS/defaul…
Substances Generally Recognized As Safe (GRAS): http://www.fda.gov/Food/IngredientsPackagingLabeling/GRAS/default.htm
Search the Code of Federal Regulations http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/cfrsearch.cfm
EU Cosmetics Inventory http://ec.europa.eu/consumers/cosmetics/cosing/










Product Types 
Baby
Bath
Eye Makeup
Facial Makeup
Fragrance
Hair Care
Hair Color
Nail
Oral Care
Personal Cleanliness
Shaving
Skin Care
Sun Protection



Resources 
History of Cosmetics
FAQs
Sustainability Report
Resources
Multimedia



About Us 
IMPORTANT LEGAL NOTICE
About Us
Privacy









                © 2023 All Rights Reserved.  Cosmeticsinfo.org
            










