Document Name: role of preserved in Eye Cream2
Document link: https://www.theorganiccaribbean.com/product/caribbean-youth-preserve-eye-cream/












Caribbean Youth Preserve Eye Cream - The Organic Caribbean





































































0Shopping CartHOME
ABOUT
GALLERY
CONTACT
SHOP
English
Search




Menu


Menu

 






You are here: Shop1 / Face Care2 / Eye Creams3 / Caribbean Youth Preserve Eye Cream



 



Caribbean Youth Preserve Eye Cream$46.00 – $160.00

FOR UNDER-EYE DARK CIRCLES, BAGS & WRINKLES
This rich cream specially formulated with the powerful ingredients for the delicate skin around eyes, goes beyond traditional moisturizing and wrinkle care alone. It counteracts the tired look, dryness, dark circles, puffiness, fine lines and wrinkles. Deeply nourishes, regenerates the cells and improves elasticity and tone, leaving the skin looking refreshed, revitalized, smoother and firmer, with visibly lifted eye contour, reduced fine lines and minimized dark circles.





Size

Choose an option0.5 oz - 15 g2 oz - 56.6 gClear 






Caribbean Youth Preserve Eye Cream quantity


Add to cart







SKU: OLS7460192902996
Categories: Face Care, Eye Creams






						How To Use					



						Ingredients					



						Reviews (0)					



How To Use:Gently massage onto clean and dry skin around the eyes, in the morning and at night. Follow with your regular face care routine. Store in a cool, dry place.
 

Ingredients:Witch Hazel (Hamamelis virginiana) Extract, Chamomilla Recutita (Matricaria) Flower Extract, Daucus Carota Sativa (Carrot) Seed Oil, Sweet Almond (Prunus amygdalus dulcis) Oil, Shea (Butyrospermum parkii) Butter, Alpha-tocopherol (Vitamin E), D-panthenol (Pro-vitamin B5), Collagen, Cetyl Palmitate, Stearyl Alcohol, Glycerol Monostearate, Glycerin, Propylene Glycol, Ceteareth-20, DMDM Hydantoin, Butylated Hydroxyanisole, Butylated Hydroxytoluene, Fragrance, Water.
NO & NEVER: GMO, SULFATES, PARABENS, ANIMAL TESTING.
 




			Reviews		
There are no reviews yet.




Be the first to review “Caribbean Youth Preserve Eye Cream” Cancel replyYou must be logged in to post a review. 








Related products


Absolute Makeup Remover
$24.00
 Select options

Caribbean Youth Preserve + Melon Day+Night Face Cream
$65.00 – $120.00
 Select options

Caribbean Youth Preserve Day+Night Face Cream
$65.00 – $120.00
 Select options

Black Peel-off Facial Mask
$32.00
 Select options






© Copyright - The Organic Caribbean 
InstagramFacebook





Shea Butter BlendApricot & Peach Day+Night Face Cream
Scroll to top

This site uses cookies. By continuing to browse the site, you are agreeing to our use of cookies.OK

Cookie and Privacy Settings

How we use cookiesWe may request cookies to be set on your device. We use cookies to let us know when you visit our websites, how you interact with us, to enrich your user experience, and to customize your relationship with our website. 
Click on the different category headings to find out more. You can also change some of your preferences. Note that blocking some types of cookies may impact your experience on our websites and the services we are able to offer.
Essential Website CookiesThese cookies are strictly necessary to provide you with services available through our website and to use some of its features. 
Because these cookies are strictly necessary to deliver the website, you cannot refuse them without impacting how our site functions. You can block or delete them by changing your browser settings and force blocking all cookies on this website.
Google Analytics CookiesThese cookies collect information that is used either in aggregate form to help us understand how our website is being used or how effective our marketing campaigns are, or to help us customize our website and application for you in order to enhance your experience. 
If you do not want that we track your visist to our site you can disable tracking in your browser here: Click to enable/disable Google Analytics tracking.
Other external servicesWe also use different external services like Google Webfonts, Google Maps and external Video providers. Since these providers may collect personal data like your IP address we allow you to block them here. Please be aware that this might heavily reduce the functionality and appearance of our site. Changes will take effect once you reload the page.
Google Webfont Settings:
Click to enable/disable Google Webfonts.
Google Map Settings:
Click to enable/disable Google Maps.
Vimeo and Youtube video embeds:
Click to enable/disable video embeds.
Privacy PolicyYou can read about our cookies and privacy settings in detail on our Privacy Policy Page. 
Caribbean Youth Preserve Eye Cream
Accept settingsHide notification onlyCheck to enable permanent hiding of message bar and refuse all cookies if you do not opt in. We need 2 cookies to store this setting. Otherwise you will be prompted again when opening a new browser window or new a tab.Click to enable/disable essential site cookies.


 






















































