Document Name: role of Water ad in Eye Cream4
Document link: https://www.tatcha.com/product/water-cream/CA05110T.html




























The Water Cream - Lightweight, Oil-Free Moisturizer | Tatcha




















































Please wait










 Skip to content



Complimentary Shipping on all U.S. Domestic Orders












Offers & Services




 Complimentary Shipping on all U.S. Domesti 


Learn More





















Toggle navigation




Ritual Finder





Shop








All Skincare


Bestsellers


Gifts & Sets


New


Minis


Ritual Finder





Category



Facial Cleansers & Exfoliators


Face Serums & Essence


Masks & Treatments


Moisturizers


Eye Care


Primer & Makeup Essentials


SPF & Body Care


Blotting Papers & Tools





Skin Type



Oily


Combination


Dry


Sensitive


Mature



Explore





 Skincare Consultation











Back to Shop




Benefit


Clarifying
Brightening
Moisturizing
Calming
Healthy Aging












Our Story






Our Story


Our Philosophy


Giving Back






Ingredients


Sustainability


Read Our Blog






Explore the Hinoki Forest








Ritual Finder




Tatcha Logo





















































Shop All










All Skincare
Bestsellers
Gifts & Sets
Moisturizers
Facial Cleansers & Exfoliators
Face Serums & Essence
Masks & Treatments
Eye Care
Primer &Makeup Essentials
SPF & Body Care
Blotting Papers & Tools 
Minis
New



Shop by Skin Type










Oily
Combination
Dry
Sensitive
Mature



Explore











Benefit











Clarifying
Brightening
Moisturizing
Calming
Healthy Aging






Our Story










Our Story
Our Philosophy
Ingredients
Giving Back
Sustainability
Read our Blog
Explore the Hinoki Forest



Consultation


Ritual Finder






My Account
















Back to Menu





  

































Most Popular Searches



toner


essence


indigo


silk









Most popular searches



toner


essence


indigo


silk





















Ritual Finder


All Skincare
Gifts + Sets
Bestsellers
New
Travel



















Your browser's Javascript functionality is turned off. Please turn it on so that you can experience the full capabilities of this site.








https://assets.tatcha.com/large/large/product-images/moisturizers/WaterCream-FS-1-main.jpg



















































































































Bestseller
Details
https://www.tatcha.com/product/water-cream/CA05110T.html
Tatcha






Item No. CA05110T



The Water Cream

 Lightweight Pore-refining Hydration 






This lightweight, clarifying water cream releases a burst of hydrating nutrients and pore-refining botanicals for healthy aging and smooth, balanced skin. 


Is this right for me?












Start Over










Hello, friend. To start, how would you describe your skin today?

Dry
Mature
Combo to Dry
Combo to Oily
Oily
Sensitive


Need Help Determining Your Skin Type?






Do you often have blackheads?

No
Yes






Are breakouts a common occurrence?

No
Yes






Would you describe your skin as being shiny or greasy?

No
Yes






Are you looking to address hyperpigmentation?

No
Yes






Is your skin lacking brightness?

No
Yes






Do you get marks or discolouration left on the skin after breakouts?

No
Yes






Do you have dark spots?

No
Yes






Are you lookimg to minimize pores?

No
Yes










Great! It looks like The Water Cream is a good match for your dry skin.







Add to Bag - $70







There may be other formulasbetter suited for your skin.
COMPARE OUR Moisturizers 








Oily












Prone to enlarged pores and regular breakouts, skin often looks shiny and feels slick.






Combination to Oily












Skin is oily at your forehead, nose, and chin, but stays relatively dry or balanced on your cheeks.






Combination to Dry












Skin tends to feel dry and tight; skin may be flaky but breakouts are rare.






Dry












Skin tends to feel dry and tight; skin may be flaky but breakouts are rare.






Sensitive












Skin may be oily, dry, or combo, but reacts to new formulas and environments with stinging, redness, and itching






Mature












Skin may be oily, dry, or combination, but shows visible signs of aging like wrinkles, loss of firmness, or age spots





Go Back









Recommended For





Oily





Combo to Oily





Firmness





Pores






Full Size

50 ml / 1.7 fl. oz.





75 ml / 2.54 fl. oz.




50 ml / 1.7 fl. oz.




10 ml / 0.34 fl. oz.






Skin Type

 Combo to
Oily 



Combo to
Dry 

 Combo to
Oily 

 Dry to
Mature 

Sensitive









One time purchase
$70







Or 4 interest-free installments of $17.50 by















Add to cart options





Auto-Delivery

$63.00





Save 10% + free shipping



 








Every 1
month


Every 2
months


Every 3
months
(Recommended)


Every 4
months


Auto-Delivery is only available in the USA.


Product Actions





Qty

1
2
3
4
5



Add to Bag - $70

















Complimentary Shipping & Returns






 Wishlist

 








Details














Why It Works

Provides nutrient-rich, balanced hydration: Unique water-burst cream breaks upon application to deeply deliver treatment benefits, hydrating without leaving skin sticky or greasy.
Clarifies and refines skin with pure, powerful Japanese botanicals:

Japanese Wild Rose visibly tightens pores and smoothes skin texture.
Japanese Leopard Lily helps control excess oil and clarify skin by encouraging natural skin turnover.

Delivers anti-aging Japanese superfoods:

Hadasei-3™, an anti-aging trinity of green tea, rice & algae, restores healthy-looking, youthful radiance.
Imparts a subtle, shine-free glow with a touch of 23-karat gold.


Consumer Results
After 1 week:

90% agreed skin feels hydrated & balanced
95% agreed skin feels softer

After 2 weeks:

100% agreed skin looks & feels smoother

After 4 weeks:

85% agreed the clarity of their skin looks improved and pores appear smaller
90% agreed skin feels balanced, not oily, had a more youthful bounce and looks radiant & luminous
95% agreed skin looks brighter with a healthy-looking glow and more moisturized (or hydrated)

*Based on a twice daily use for four weeks, in an independent consumer study of 20 women.









Ingredients













Featured Ingredients
Japanese Wild Rose: In traditional Eastern medicine, Japanese Wild Rose is used to bring the body back into balance, improve circulation and even calm the spirit. We found that the antioxidant-rich fruits of this fragrant blossom can balance skin and diminish the look of pores.
Japanese Leopard Lily: Found on the cool hillsides of Japan, this bright bloom has been prized for centuries. Used to decorate the streets of Kyoto’s geisha district during the Gion Festival, Japanese Leopard Lily has earned the name “the flower of Kyoto.” We’ve harnessed its special powers to help minimize excess oil production, calm problem skin, and promote turnover of the skin.
Hadasei-3™ Complex: This trio of antioxidant-rich Japanese superfoods reveals soft, healthy-looking skin. Featuring Uji Green Tea (known to detoxify and help prevent signs of premature aging), Okinawa Red Algae (rich in polysaccharides, essential for skin water retention and renewal), and Akita Rice (a nourishing moisturizer, rich in essential proteins).



See full ingredient list






Ingredients



Aqua/water/eau, Saccharomyces/camellia Sinensis Leaf/cladosiphon Okamuranus/rice Ferment Filtrate*, Dimethicone, Propanediol, Glycerin, Diglycerin, Diphenylsiloxy Phenyl Trimethicone, Gold, Belamcanda Chinensis Root Extract, Rosa Multiflora Fruit Extract, Houttuynia Cordata Extract, Sophora Angustifolia Root Extract, Sodium Hyaluronate, Lecithin, Pistacia Lentiscus (Mastic) Gum, Sodium Chloride, Sodium Citrate, Mica, Peg-9 Polydimethylsiloxyethyl Dimethicone, Dimethicone/peg-10/15 Crosspolymer, Dimethicone/phenyl Vinyl Dimethicone Crosspolymer, Disodium Edta, Tin Oxide, Titanium Dioxide, Butylene Glycol, Ethylhexylglycerin, Parfum/fragrance, Alcohol, Phenoxyethanol

*Hadasei-3






Oil-free. Non-comedogenic. Non-irritating. Dermatologist tested. Cruelty-free.


Formulated without: Mineral oil, synthetic fragrances, sulfate detergents, parabens, urea, DEA, TEA or phthalates.








How to use













Dosage: Pearl-sized amount
Texture: Refreshing water-burst cream
Scoop a pearl-sized amount of cream with the gold spoon. Massage onto face, neck and décolletage in upward strokes. Use daily, morning and night.




For best results, Pair with











The Deep Cleanse

Gentle Exfoliating Cleanser

Why:Unclog and tighten pores with our gentle, exfoliating cleanser.











Add to Bag- $40




Add both - $110
















The Tatcha Replenishment Service


By signing up, you’ll receive the following program perks:

10% off all auto delivery purchases
Free shipping & returns
Product sent at the frequency you've selected until you cancel
Manage the delivery frequency and billing directly from your Tatcha.com account
Cancel up to 24 hours before the upcoming order date from your Tatcha.com account
Convenient billing to your credit card at the frequency of the auto-delivery selected
Access to Team Love—our skincare experts—for any questions you may have
For more information visit our Auto-Delivery FAQ page
















































Terms & Conditions





E-Gift Card orders placed before 5 PM Pacific Time, Monday through Friday (excluding holidays) can be e-delivered the same day. After 5 PM, E-Gift Card orders will be processed the next business day.
You cannot purchase an online gift certificate with another gift certificate.
If the amount of your online gift certificates does NOT cover the total order amount, you will need to pay the remainder of the purchase with a valid credit card.
If the amount of your online gift certificates is for MORE than the total order amount, the balance will be stored with your Tatcha.com account for your next purchase using the same gift certificate code.
If you have any additional questions, please contact our Customer Service team.
Online gift certificates are non-transferable, non-refundable and are not redeemable for cash (except where required by state law).
We cannot replace lost or stolen online gift certificates. We do not charge sales tax when you buy an online gift certificate because it is charged when the gift certificate is used. State tax may be added to all orders shipped to addresses in the states indicated here.




Close









Notify Me

×







You will be notified via email when the product is in stock




Email me when the product is avaliable








Keep me up to date on news and offers



Cancel
Notify Me












Suggested Ritual







Step 1








The Deep Cleanse

Gentle Exfoliating Cleanser






 
 
 















Add to Bag - $40







Step 2








The Texture Tonic

Liquid Exfoliating Treatment






 
 
 















Add to Bag - $62







Step 3








The Essence

Skincare Boosting Treatment






 
 
 















Add to Bag - $110







Step 4








The Water Cream

Lightweight Pore-refining Hydration






 
 
 















Add to Bag - $70










Add all 4 to Bag - $282




































 Every Tatcha purchase supports education equality worldwide. Learn more








Keep in Touch
Signup for access to special offers, new products, tips, and more.

















Thank you! Your email subscription is confirmed.


Your subscription has already been confirmed.








































Company











Company



About Us


Giving Back


Sustainability


Where to Buy


Careers










Help











Help



Help Center


Shipping


Return Policy


Skincare Consultation


Corporate Gifting


Contact Us










Account











Account



My Account



Auto-delivery


Track an Order













United States


United Kingdom
Japan
Hong Kong SAR, China







 © 2023 Tatcha, LLC. All Rights Reserved.

Cookie and Privacy Notice
|
Terms & Conditions
|
Terms of Sale
|

|
Sitemap
|
Modern Slavery Act
|
Accessibility





























This website uses cookies and other technologies to understand your use of our website and to give you a better experience. By continuing to use the site or closing this banner, you agree to our use of cookies and other technologies. To find out more about cookies and how to change your choices, please go to our Privacy Policy.























LOGIN TO TATCHA





One or more auto-delivery items are in your cart. 
Please login in or create an account to proceed






Email


Continue



OR


Continue with Google








New to Tatcha? Create An Account



WELCOME
Enter your password or login with a secure link sent to your email.














Password










Login


Forgot your password?


OR

get a secure link to login


Back to Login




check your email






An email has been sent to  with a secure link to get back into your account.
For help at any time, please contact our customer support team.


































Terms of Use

Thank you for visiting our site. Tatcha LLC (hereinafter "Tatcha", "we," "us" or "our") provides the information, content and services ("Services") available via our website www.tatcha.com (the "Site") to you ("you") pursuant to the following Terms & Conditions of Use ("Terms").
Please read these Terms carefully before using our Site, as they set forth the legally binding terms and conditions for your use of the Site and all related Content (defined below), Services, apps and purchases that you make from the Site, regardless of the means, manner or place from which you access our Site. By accessing and using Tatcha's Site and Content, you acknowledge and agree to abide by the following Terms. If you do not agree to these Terms, do not use Tatcha's Site or Content.
Tatcha reserves the right to change these Terms at any time without notice. Such changed Terms will take effect once We post them at the Site, and Your continued use of the Site following any such changes will mean that You accept and agree to them.
Privacy
Please also review Tatcha's Privacy Policy, which also governs your use of our Site and Services.
Your Use of Tatcha's Site & Services
Tatcha grants you a limited license to access and use the Site for your own personal and non-commercial use. Unless otherwise permitted by these Terms, you may not copy, distribute, display, transmit, perform, modify, publish or create derivative works from the Site or its Content.
You may not download (other than page caching) or modify any portion of the Site without Tatcha's express written consent. You may not resell or make any other commercial use of the Site or its contents, collect and use product listings, descriptions, or prices, creative derivative works from Tatcha's Site or its contents, download or copy account information for another person's or entity's benefit, or use data mining, robots, or similar data gathering and extraction tools on, in or in connection with the Site. You may not reproduce, duplicate, copy, sell, mirror or otherwise exploit any portion of the Site for any commercial purpose without Tatcha's prior express written consent.
You may not frame or use framing techniques to enclose any Tatcha trademark, logo, or other proprietary information (including images, text, page layout, or form) without Tatcha's express written consent. You may not use any meta tags or any other "hidden text" utilizing Tatcha's name or trademarks without Tatcha's express written consent. You may not probe, scan or test the vulnerability of the Site or any network connected to the Site, nor breach the Site's security or authentication measures.
You agree that you will not take any action that imposes an unreasonable or disproportionately large load on the Site's infrastructure or supporting networks, or any systems or networks connected thereto. You agree not to use any device, software or routine to interfere or attempt to interfere with the proper working of the Site or any transaction being conducted on the Site, or with any other person's use of the Site, or use the Site or Content in any manner that could damage, impair, overburden or disable the Site or any component that enables the Site's proper operation.
You agree not to impersonate any person or entity, or misrepresent your affiliation with any person or entity. You agree not to use the Site to harass or stalk any individual, nor entrap nor harm any other person, including harming minors in any way. You may create a hyperlink to the Site so long as You do not portray Tatcha, its products or services in a false, misleading, derogatory, or otherwise offensive matter. You may not use any Tatcha logo or other proprietary graphic or image as part of the link without Tatcha's express prior written permission.
You agree that when accessing or using the Site and/or Services, you will act in accordance with the law, custom and in good faith. You may not make any change to the Site and may not impair in any way the Site's integrity or operation. Without limiting the generality of any other provision of these Terms, if you default negligently or willfully in any of the obligations set forth in these Terms, you shall be liable for all of the resulting losses and damages.
By communicating with Tatcha electronically (such as by visiting our Site or sending us e-mails), You consent to receive communications from us electronically. Tatcha will communicate with you by e-mail or by posting notices on this site. You agree that all agreements, notices, disclosures and other communications that we provide to you electronically satisfy any legal requirement that such communications be in writing.
Your Account
We may require you to register with Tatcha in order to use certain Site features or Services, such as to purchase products. When you register, we may decline to grant you, and you may not use, a user name or email address that another person or entity already owns or uses, that might be construed as impersonating another person, that might violate another's intellectual property or other rights, that we may deem offensive or objectionable, or that we reject for any other reason in our sole discretion.
You are responsible for maintaining the confidentiality of your account details (including Your password and account data that you may use to access the Site) and restricting access to your computer, and you agree not to transfer your password or user name, or lend or otherwise transfer your use of or access to the Site, to any third party. You agree to accept full responsibility for all activities that occur under and/or within your account or password. You agree to immediately notify Tatcha of any unauthorized use of your password or user name or any other breach of your account's security, and to ensure that you "log off" and exit from your account at the end of each Site visit. Tatcha will not be liable for any loss or damage that you or anyone else may incur from another's use of your account, or arising from your failure to comply with any of the foregoing obligations. We reserve the right to refuse service and/or terminate accounts without prior notice if these Terms are violated or if we decide, in our sole discretion, that it would be in the best interest of Tatcha or its community to do so.
Your Product Orders
The products and Services available at our Site are for personal use only. You may not sell or resell any of the products or Services, or samples thereof, that you purchase or otherwise obtain from Us. We reserve the right, with or without notice, to cancel or reduce the quantity of any order to be filled, or products or services to be provided, that we believe, in Our sole discretion, may result in the violation of our Terms. You must eighteen (18) years old (or the age of majority in your jurisdiction) to purchase from our site.
Additional terms and conditions may apply to your purchases and to specific Site features such as contests or promotions, all of which terms are made a part of these Terms by this reference. You agree to abide by such other terms and conditions. In the event of any conflict between these Terms and terms for a specific promotion or other Service of the Site, the latter terms shall control with respect to your use of that promotion or specific Service.
Auto-Delivery Program
If you participate in our auto-refill program, the following terms and conditions apply
specifically to your participation in this program:

Participation will continue until canceled. You may cancel your participation in the
program from within your Tatcha account up to 24 hours before the
upcoming order date from your Tatcha account. We may, in our sole discretion,
terminate your participation in the program at any time without notice to you.
You can cancel an upcoming order up to 24 hours before the upcoming order date from
your Tatcha account.
A recurring charge will be automatically charged to your credit card at the time of each
successive shipment. Product selection and the shipment frequency will be in
accordance with your preferences elected at the time of program registration or as
modified by you from time to time in your account.
You are obligated to provide current, complete, and accurate information for your
billing account. You are responsible for promptly updating all information to keep your
billing account current, complete, and accurate (e.g., change in billing address, credit
card number, or credit card expiration date). You must promptly notify us if your credit
card information is canceled or is no longer valid (e.g., loss or theft of your credit card).


Changes to such information can be made from your Tatcha account. Add the new card
and select it as the default credit card.
Product Information
All of the Site's material and information is offered solely for personal educational or informational purposes. The information, materials, statements and Services are not intended to diagnose, treat or prevent any condition or illness. Please use all products strictly in accordance with their instructions, precautions, warnings and guidelines. Please always check each product's ingredients to avoid potential allergic reactions. Minors may use goods or product obtained from the Site only after the minor's parent(s) or guardian has discussed the product's use with the minor's physician or medical professional. Any statements offered about products have not been evaluated by the United States Food & Drug Administration (unless otherwise specified), and any results reported may not necessarily occur in all individuals. Tatcha products are not intended for use in medical, life-saving or life-sustaining applications, nor for any application in which the product's failure could create a situation where personal injury or death may occur.
Tatcha has endeavored to provide accurate information on the Site, but assumes no responsibility for the information's accuracy. We do not warrant that the product descriptions, details, colors or other content on the Site are accurate, complete, reliable, current, or error-free. The Site's reference to any goods, services, processes, activities or other information offered by other parties does not imply any endorsement or recommendation by Tatcha itself unless specifically stated otherwise. Our Site may contain inaccuracies or typographical errors, and may not be complete or current. Tatcha reserves the right to correct any errors, inaccuracies or omissions (including after you have submitted an order) and to change or update information at any time without prior notice. We reserve the right to cancel or to decline to accept any order placed based on incorrect pricing or availability information, and we apologize for any inconvenience this may cause.
Please note that while Tatcha has endeavored accurately to depict, describe and display the particular product color(s), the actual colors that you see may depend upon your viewing device, and may not be accurate.
Site Content
Tatcha owns and/or controls the rights to all of the Site's images, text, graphics, user interfaces, designs, photographs, trademarks, logos, sounds, music, artwork and computer code ("Content"), including the design, "look and feel," trade dress, structure, selection, coordination, and arrangement thereof, all of which is protected by trademark, copyright and related laws (see "Intellectual Property" below).
You may access, view, download, and print Content for your personal, non-commercial use only, provided that you do not modify or make commercial use of Content, and retain all copyright, trademark, or other proprietary designations contained in Content. Except as these Terms expressly provide, you may not copy, reproduce, upload, republish, encode, transmit or distribute any part of the Site or Content in any way or form to any other computer, server, web site or other medium for publication or distribution or for any commercial purpose without Tatcha's express prior written consent.
Your User Content
Tatcha's Site may provide functionality enabling you to make available your own comments and content. When you transmit, upload, post, e-mail, share, distribute, reproduce or otherwise make available any comments, suggestions, ideas, inquiries, data, text, software, music, audio files, photographs, graphics, images, videos, messages, ideas, suggestions or other materials ("User Content") on or to Tatcha's Site, you are entirely responsible for such User Content. You understand you are participating in a public forum and that any User Content that you submit to Tatcha and/or the Site may be available to all other Site users. Tatcha does not endorse any User Content, nor any opinion, representation, recommendation or advice contained therein, and Tatcha expressly disclaims any and all liability in connection with User Content submissions.
As to all User Content that you submit, you warrant that:
(a) you are either the User Content's sole author and owner of all intellectual property rights therein, or you possess all necessary rights, releases, consents and/or licenses to enable and authorize you and Tatcha's use of the User Content at the Site (and elsewhere) as provided hereunder;
(b) any User Content that you submit is: (i) not false, defamatory, obscene or misleading, (ii) does not violate any right of any other person or entity, or any applicable law or ordinance, (iii) does not contain any computer viruses, malware or other potentially harmful electronic files, or any material intended to disrupt, alter, damage or destroy any part of the Site, (iv) does not contain any unauthorized advertising, and (v) Is not, or would not reasonably be considered to be harmful, defamatory, bullying, libelous, vulgar, obscene, pornographic, invasive of another's privacy, hateful, racially or religiously biased or offensive, abusive, tortious, threatening or harassing to any individual, partnership or corporation.
You grant to Tatcha a royalty-free, perpetual, worldwide, unlimited, nonexclusive, irrevocable, license to use, copy, publish, distribute, modify, edit, create derivative works from, translate and display any User Content that you make available, in any media or medium, and in any form, format, or forum now known or hereafter developed. You further agree that Tatcha is free to use any User Content for any purpose, including but not limited to the Site, Tatcha e-mails, social media posts, media content or promotional materials. Tatcha shall be under no obligation to preserve, or pay compensation for use of any User Content. You further grant to Tatcha the right to use your name in connection with any such User Content, but Tatcha shall not be obligated to attribute any of your User Content to you. You warrant that all User Content that you submit shall comply with the Federal Trade Commission's Guides on the Use of Endorsements and Testimonials in Advertising, including but not limited to your disclosing if you have received any incentive or compensation for submitting User Content to the Site.
Tatcha is and shall not be responsible for evaluating your User Content, and does not assume any responsibility or liability for User Content. We do not endorse or control the User Content transmitted or posted on the Site and do not warrant its accuracy, integrity or quality. You acknowledge that by using the Site, you may be exposed to User Content that is offensive, indecent or objectionable to you. You hereby waive all rights to any claims against Tatcha of any type arising out of your use of the Site or any User Content that you may encounter at the Site. You acknowledge that Tatcha has the right (but not the obligation) in our sole discretion to refuse to post or remove any User Content.
Intellectual Property
The Site and its Content Copyright 2018 Tatcha LLC. All rights reserved. Tatcha and the Tatcha logo are registered trademarks, and Hadassei-3, Beauty for a Lifetime and Skincare for the Soul are trademarks, of Tatcha LLC. You acknowledge and agree that Tatcha owns all legal rights, title and interest in and to the Site and Content, including any Tatcha trademarks, trade names, trade dress, logos, domain names and other brand features therein (whether those rights are registered or not, and wherever in the world they may exist), and that they are protected by international copyright laws and treaties. Tatcha does not grant you any express or implied right under any copyright, trademark, patent, trade secret or other intellectual property right.
DMCA Copyright Infringement Notices
Tatcha respects others' intellectual property rights, and requires that you do the same in your use of the Site. If you are a copyright owner or an agent thereof and believe that any User Content or other content on the Site infringes upon your copyrights, you may submit a notification pursuant to the Digital Millennium Copyright Act ("DMCA") by providing our Copyright Agent with the following information in writing (see 17 U.S.C 512(c)(3) for further detail): A physical or electronic signature of a person authorized to act on behalf of the owner of the copyright interest that you claim is infringed;

Identification of the copyrighted work(s) that you claim has been infringed;
A description of the material that you claim is infringing and the location of that material on the Site;
Your address, telephone number and email address;
A statement by you that you have a good faith belief that the use of the material in the manner complained of is not authorized by the copyright owner, its agent, or the law; and
A statement by you, made under penalty of perjury, that the above information in your notice is accurate and that you are the copyright owner or authorized to act on the copyright owner's behalf.

Our Designated Agent for notice for claims of copyright infringement is Tatcha LLC, 208 Utah, Suite 400, San Francisco, California, 94103, e-mail: copyrightclaims@tatcha.com. Only DMCA notices should go to Tatcha's Copyright Agent; any other feedback or comments should be directed to our customer service, and will not receive a response from Tatcha's copyright agent. You acknowledge that if you fail to comply with all of the requirements set forth above, your DMCA notice may not be valid.
Upon receipt of a notice complying with the DMCA, we will act expeditiously to remove or disable access to any material claimed to be infringing. We will take reasonable steps promptly to notify the user that we have removed or disabled access to such material.
Indemnification
You agree to defend (at Tatcha's option), indemnify, and hold Tatcha (including its officers, directors, employees, agents, licensors, subsidiaries and suppliers) harmless from and against any and all claims, actions, demands, losses, liabilities and settlements, of every kind and nature, known and unknown, including without limitation, reasonable legal and accounting fees, made against Tatcha by any third party due to, resulting from, or alleged to result from, your use of the Site, your violation of these Terms and Conditions and/or any law, rule, regulation and/or contract, your violation of any third party's rights (including copyright or privacy right), or any claim relating to content that you submitted to the Site.
Limitation of Liability
YOU EXPRESSLY UNDERSTAND AND AGREE THAT TATCHA SHALL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ANY DAMAGES OF ANY KIND ARISING FROM THE USE OF THIS SITE, FROM ANY INFORMATION, CONTENT, MATERIALS, PRODUCTS OR SERVICES INCLUDED ON OR MADE AVAILABLE TO YOU THROUGH THE SITE, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, PUNITIVE, EXEMPLARY, AND CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, INCLUDING LOST PROFITS, UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED IN WRITING. THESE LIMITATIONS ON TATCHA'S LIABILITY SHALL APPLY WHETHER OR NOT TATCHA HAS BEEN ADVISED OF OR SHOULD HAVE BEEN AWARE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF ANY SUCH LOSSES. CERTAIN STATE LAWS DO NOT ALLOW LIMITATIONS ON IMPLIED WARRANTIES OR THE EXCLUSION OR LIMITATION OF CERTAIN DAMAGES. IF THESE LAWS APPLY TO YOU, SOME OR ALL OF THE ABOVE DISCLAIMERS, EXCLUSIONS, OR LIMITATIONS MAY NOT APPLY TO YOU, AND YOU MAY HAVE ADDITIONAL RIGHTS.
Disclaimer of Warranties
THE SITE AND ITS CONTENT AND SERVICES ARE PRESENTED "AS IS." TATCHA MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND WHATSOEVER, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, NON-INFRINGEMENT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PARTICULAR PURPOSE IN CONNECTION WITH THE SITE OR ITS CONTENTS OR SERVICES. YOU AGREE THAT YOUR USE OF THE SITE AND CONTENT IS AT YOUR SOLE RISK. YOU AGREE THAT TATCHA WILL NOT BE RESPONSIBLE OR LIABLE IN CONTRACT, WARRANTY OR IN TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE) FOR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION DAMAGES FOR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION OR LOSS OF PROFITS, ACCESS DELAYS OR INTERRUPTIONS TO THE SITE, DATA NON-DELIVERY, MISDELIVERY, CORRUPTION, DESTRUCTION OR OTHER MODIFICATION, COMPUTER VIRUSES, SYSTEM FAILURES OR MALFUNCTIONS WHICH MAY OCCUR IN CONNECTION WITH YOUR USE OF THE SITE, ANY INACCURACIES OR OMISSIONS IN CONTENT AND/OR EVENTS BEYOND OUR REASONABLE CONTROL, EVEN IF TATCHA HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.
Severability
If any provision of these Terms may be held by a court or agency of competent jurisdiction to be void or unenforceable, such provisions shall be limited or eliminated to the minimum extent necessary and replaced with a valid provision that best embodies the intent of these Terms, and the remainder of these Terms shall remain in full force and effect.
Void Where Prohibited; Dispute Resolution
Tatcha operates and administers the site from San Francisco, California, USA. Although the Site is potentially accessible worldwide, not all features or products are available to all persons or geographic locations, or appropriate or lawful for use outside the United States. Tatcha reserved the right to limit, in our sole discretion, the quantity or provision of any product or service to any person, entity or geographic area. Any offer for any feature, product or service made on the Site is void where prohibited. If you choose to access the Site from outside the United States, you do so on your own initiative and you are solely responsible for complying with applicable local laws.
You agree that the laws of the United States and State of California, excluding its conflict of laws rules, and these Terms and Conditions, our Privacy Policy and any other policies posted from time to time on the Site shall govern your use of the Site. For any claim or dispute with us or relating to your use of the Site, or to these Terms, you expressly agree to the exclusive jurisdiction and venue of the courts of the County of San Francisco, State of California. In the event of any violation of these Terms, Tatcha reserves the right to seek all remedies available under law and equity for such violations.
Tatcha may revise these Terms at any time by updating this page.







Privacy Policy

Welcome to the TATCHA, LLC ("TATCHA," "we," "us," or "our") website. TATCHA offers our users (collectively, "Users," "you," or "your") high-quality, holistic skincare products made with time-tested ingredients (the "Products") through our website at www.tatcha.com (the "Site").
This Privacy Policy explains what personal data we collect through the Site, how we use and share that data, and your choices concerning our data practices. This Privacy Policy forms part of our Terms of Use, which are available at: https://www.tatcha.com/terms-of-use.html.
By providing us with your personal data when using the Site, you agree to the practices described in this Privacy Policy. If you do not agree to this Privacy Policy, please do not access or use the Site. Before you submit any personal data to TATCHA through the Site, please review this Privacy Policy carefully, and contact us at privacy@tatcha.com if you have any questions.
Information We Receive From Your Use of the Site:
When you visit, use and interact with the Site, we may receive certain information about your visit, use or interactions. For example, we may monitor the number of people that visit our Site, peak hours of visits, which page(s) are visited on our Site, the domains our visitors come from (e.g., google.com, yahoo.com, etc.), and which browsers people use to access and visit our Site (e.g., Firefox, Microsoft Internet Explorer, etc.), broad geographical information, and Site-navigation pattern. In particular, the following information is created and automatically logged in our systems:

Log data: Information (“log data”) that your browser automatically sends whenever you visit the Site. Log data includes your Internet Protocol (“IP”) address (so we understand which country you are connecting from when you visit the Site), browser type and settings, the date and time of your request, and how you interacted with the Site.
Information from cookies, pixel tags and other technologies. Please see the “Cookies and Other Technologies” section below to learn more about how we use cookies and other technologies.
Device information: Includes name of the device, operating system, and browser you are using. Information collected may depend on the type of device you use and its settings.
Usage information: We collect information about how you use our Site, such as the types of content that you view or engage with, the features you use, the actions you take, and the time, frequency and duration of your activities.

How We Use Information
We use your Personal Data for the following purposes:
To process your orders, including processing your payments, dispatching products, tracking orders and providing you with related customer service, including communicating with you as necessary in connection with your orders. This processing is necessary to perform our contract with you.
As necessary for certain legitimate business interests, which include the following:

To respond to your inquiries, comments, feedback or questions;
To customize your browsing and shopping experience on the Site. For example, we use information on your use of Site features, including information that we obtain through cookies and other technologies, to better understand your needs and interests in order to personalize your experience by presenting Products and offers tailored to your interests (please read below to learn how we use (cookies and other technologies);
To send administrative information to you, for example, information regarding the Site, and changes to our terms, conditions, and policies;
To analyze Site usage and provide, maintain and improve the content and functionality of the Site. For example, we regularly fix bugs or User experience issues that may be tied to particular User accounts. We use cookies and other technologies to analyze how Users interact with our Site. And that analysis can help us improve the Site;
To conduct analytics to inform our marketing strategy and enable us to enhance and personalize the experience we offer to our users, including by creating User profiles to enable personalized direct marketing communications.
If you ask us to delete your data and we are required to fulfill your request, to keep basic data to identify you and prevent further unwanted processing;
To prevent fraud, criminal activity, or misuses of our Site, block prohibited reseller traffic, and to ensure the security of our IT systems, architecture and networks; and
To comply with legal obligations and legal process and to protect our rights, privacy, safety or property, and/or that of our affiliates, you or other third parties.

For information about what we mean by legitimate interests and the rights of individuals in the European Union (“EU”), please see the “EU Users” section below.
Marketing. We may contact you to tell you about services or Products we believe will be of interest to you. For instance, if you elect to provide your date of birth and your skin type through your account page, we may use that information to inform you about Products we believe would work well for you or to send you special offers on or near your birthday. If we do, where required by law, for example if you are a User in the EU, we will only send you marketing information if you consent to us doing so at the time you provide us with your Personal Data. You may opt out of receiving such emails by following the instructions contained in each promotional email we send you or by updating your user settings. In addition, if at any time you do not wish to receive future marketing communications, please contact us at privacy@tatcha.com. If you unsubscribe from our marketing lists, we will continue to contact you via email regarding the provision of our Site and Products (i.e. to update you about your orders) and to respond to your requests.
Contests, Surveys And Promotions
From time to time, we may offer you the opportunity to participate in contests, giveaways and other promotions, and in surveys designed to help us improve the Site or our Products. Any Personal Data you voluntarily provide us in connection with such activities is subject to this Privacy Policy, to the extent applicable, and to any additional policies, terms and rules for those promotions and surveys provided at the time of data collection. Please ensure that you read relevant notices provided to you in the promotions and surveys web pages when we collect or process your personal data.
Targeted Advertisements. We may display targeted advertisements based on Personal Data. TATCHA does not provide any Personal Data to the advertiser when a User interacts with or views a targeted advertisement. However, please be aware that by interacting with or viewing an advertisement the third party that served the ad may make the assumption that you meet the targeting criteria used to display the advertisement. Please read the “Cookies and other Technologies” section below for information about advertising cookies and other technologies that we use on the Site, and your choices in relation to such use.
Sharing And Disclosure Of Information
In certain circumstances we may share your Personal Data with third parties without further notice to you, unless required by the law, as set forth below:

Vendors and Service Providers: To assist us in meeting business operations needs and to perform certain services and functions: providers of hosting, cloud services and other information technology services providers; our payment processor PayPal, Inc.; order management services; e-commerce platforms; rating and reviews platforms; email communication and customer support services (including live chat); web analytics, marketing and digital advertising services (for more details on the third parties that place cookies through the Site, please see the “Cookies and Other Technologies” section below). Pursuant to our instructions, these parties will access, process or store Personal Data in the course of performing their duties to us.
Business Transfers: If we are involved in a merger, acquisition, financing due diligence, reorganization, bankruptcy, receivership, sale of all or a portion of our assets, or transition of service to another provider, your Personal Data and other information may be transferred to a successor or affiliate as part of that transaction along with other assets.
Legal Requirements: If required to do so by law or in the good faith belief that such action is necessary to (i) comply with a legal obligation, including to meet national security or law enforcement requirements, (ii) protect and defend our rights or property, (iii) prevent fraud, (iv) act in urgent circumstances to protect the personal safety of Users of the Site, or the public, or (v) protect against legal liability.

Data Retention
We will keep your Personal Data for as long as reasonably necessary for the purposes described in this Privacy Policy, while we have a legitimate business need to do so, or as required by law (e.g. for tax, legal, accounting or other purposes), whichever is the longer.
If you have elected to receive marketing communications from us, we retain information about your marketing preferences until you opt out of receiving these communications and in accordance with our policies.
To determine the appropriate retention period for your Personal Data, we will consider the amount, nature, and sensitivity of the Personal Data, the potential risk of harm from unauthorized use or disclosure of your Personal Data, the purposes for which we use your Personal Data and whether we can achieve those purposes through other means, and the applicable legal requirements. In some circumstances we may anonymize your Personal Data so that it can no longer be associated with you, in which case it is no longer Personal Data.
Update Your Information
If you need to change or correct your Personal Data, or wish to have it deleted from our systems, you may contact us at privacy@tatcha.com. We will address your request as required by applicable law. You may also update your Personal Data from your user settings.
California Privacy Disclosures
Do Not Track Signals: Our Site currently does not respond to “Do Not Track” (“DNT”) signals and operate as described in this Privacy Policy whether or not a DNT signal is received. If we do respond to DNT signals in the future, we will update this Privacy Policy to describe how we do so.
Children
TATCHA does not knowingly collect Personal Data from children under the age of 13. If you have reason to believe that a child under the age of 13 has provided Personal Data to TATCHA through the Site please contact us and we will endeavor to delete that information from our databases.
Links To Other Websites
The Site may contain links to other websites not operated or controlled by TATCHA (“Third Party Sites”), including social media services. The information that you share with Third Party Sites will be governed by the specific privacy policies and terms of service of the Third Party Sites and not by this Privacy Policy. By providing these links we do not imply that we endorse or have reviewed these sites. Please contact those sites directly for information on their privacy practices and policies.
EU Users
Scope. This section applies if you are a User in the EU (for these purposes, reference to the EU also includes the European Economic Area countries of Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway and, to the extent applicable, Switzerland).
Data Controller. Tatcha, LLC is the data controller for the processing of your Personal Data. To find out our contact details, please see the “Contact Us” section below, which also provides the contact details of our representative in the EU for purposes of the General Data Protection Regulation.
Your Rights. Subject to applicable EU law, you have the following rights in relation to your Personal Data:

Right of access: If you ask us, we will confirm whether we are processing your Personal Data and, if so, provide you with a copy of that Personal Data along with certain other details. If you require additional copies, we may need to charge a reasonable fee.
Right to rectification: If your Personal Data is inaccurate or incomplete, you are entitled to ask that we correct or complete it. If we shared your Personal Data with others, we will tell them about the correction where possible. If you ask us, and where possible and lawful to do so, we will also tell you with whom we shared your Personal Data so you can contact them directly.
Right to erasure: You may ask us to delete or remove your Personal Data, such as where you withdraw your consent. If we shared your data with others, we will tell them about the erasure where possible. If you ask us, and where possible and lawful to do so, we will also tell you with whom we shared your Personal Data with so you can contact them directly.
Right to restrict processing: You may ask us to restrict or ‘block’ the processing of your Personal Data in certain circumstances, such as where you contest the accuracy of the data or object to us processing it (please read below for information on your right to object). We will tell you before we lift any restriction on processing. If we shared your Personal Data with others, we will tell them about the restriction where possible. If you ask us, and where possible and lawful to do so, we will also tell you with whom we shared your Personal Data so you can contact them directly.
Right to data portability: You have the right to obtain your Personal Data from us that you consented to give us or that was provided to us as necessary in connection with our contract with you, and that is processed by automated means. We will give you your Personal Data in a structured, commonly used and machine-readable format. You may reuse it elsewhere.
Right to object: You may ask us at any time to stop processing your Personal Data, and we will do so:

If we are relying on a legitimate interest to process your Personal Data -- unless we demonstrate compelling legitimate grounds for the processing or
If we are processing your Personal Data for direct marketing.


Right to withdraw consent: If we rely on your consent to process your Personal Data, you have the right to withdraw that consent at any time. Withdrawal of consent will not affect any processing of your data before we received notice that you wished to withdraw consent.
Right to lodge a complaint with the data protection authority: If you have a concern about our privacy practices, including the way we handled your Personal Data, you can report it to the data protection authority that is authorized to hear those concerns.

Please see the “Contact Us” section below for information on how to exercise your rights.
Legitimate Interest. “Legitimate interests” means our interests in conducting our business, fulfilling the obligations under our contract with you and managing and delivering the best services to you. This Privacy Policy describes when we process your Personal Data for our legitimate interests, what these interests are and your rights. We will not use your Personal Data for activities where the impact on you overrides our interests, unless we have your consent or those activities are otherwise required or permitted by law.
Data Transfers. We rely on the EU-U.S. and Swiss-U.S. Privacy Shield certification to transfer Personal Data that we receive from the EU and Switzerland to TATCHA in the U.S. (for more information, please read the “Privacy Shield” section below).
Cookies And Other Technologies 
We and our partners use cookies and other technologies to operate and administer our Site, make it easier for you to use the Site during future visits, gather usage data on our Site and for advertising purposes. For more information about the cookies and similar technologies used on our Site, please refer to the Cookie Policy.
Security
You use the Site at your own risk. We comply with industry standards to protect Personal Data both online and offline from loss, misuse, and unauthorized access, disclosure, alteration or destruction. For example, we use available technology and other techniques to implement systems like firewalls, and/or encryption to secure marketing data transfers. However, no Internet or e-mail transmission is ever fully secure or error free. In particular, e-mail sent to or from us in connection with our use of the Site, including purchases of Products, may not be secure. Therefore, you should take special care in deciding what information you send to us via the Site or e-mail. Please keep this in mind when disclosing any Personal Data to TATCHA via the internet. We cannot control the actions of other Users with whom you may choose to share information. Therefore, we cannot, and do not, guarantee that information or content posted by a User on or through the Site will not be viewed by unauthorized persons. We are not responsible for circumvention of any privacy settings or security measures contained on the Site or third party websites.
Changes To The Privacy Policy
The Site and our business may change from time to time. As a result we may change this Privacy Policy at any time and when we do we will post an updated version on this page, unless another type of notice is required by the applicable law. By continuing to use the Site or providing us with information after we have posted an updated Privacy Policy, or notified you if applicable, you consent to the revised Privacy Policy and practices described in it.
Privacy Shield
TATCHA complies with the EU-U.S. and Swiss-U.S. Privacy Shield frameworks (“Frameworks”) as set forth by the U.S. Department of Commerce regarding the transfer of personal data from the EU and Switzerland to the U.S. (for these purposes, reference to the EU also includes the European Economic Area countries of Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway). TATCHA has certified that it adheres to the Privacy Shield Principles (described below). If there is any conflict between the policies in this Privacy Policy and the EU or Swiss Privacy Shield Principles, the Privacy Shield Principles shall govern. To learn more about the Frameworks and to view our certification page, please visit https://www.privacyshield.gov/.
General. We rely on our Privacy Shield certifications to transfer Personal Data that we receive from the EU and Switzerland to TATCHA in the U.S. and we process such Personal Data in accordance with the Privacy Shield Principles of Notice, Choice, Accountability for Onward Transfer, Security, Data Integrity and Purpose Limitation, Access, and Recourse, Enforcement and Liability (“Privacy Shield Principles”), as described below.
Notice And Choice. This Privacy Policy provides notice of the Personal Data collected and transferred under the Privacy Shield and the choice that you have with respect to such Personal Data. It also provides information about other Privacy Shield Principles that are set forth below.
Accountability for Onward Transfers.  We may be accountable for the Personal Data that we transfer to third-party service providers (as described in the “Sharing and Disclosure of Information” section above). If such service providers process Personal Data in a manner inconsistent with the Privacy Shield Principles, we are responsible for the harm caused.
Security. We maintain security measures to protect Personal Data as described in the “Security” section of this Privacy Policy.
Data Integrity and Purpose Limitation. We take reasonable steps to ensure that Personal Data is reliable for its intended use, and that it is accurate, complete and current for as long as we retain it. Our data retention practices are described in the Data Retention section of this Privacy Policy.
Access. EU Users have certain rights to access, correct, amend, or delete Personal Data where it is inaccurate, or has been processed in violation of the Privacy Shield Principles. Please see the “EU Users” section above for more information on the rights of Users in the EU (and, to the extent applicable, Users in Switzerland).
Recourse, Enforcement, Liability. In compliance with the Privacy Shield Principles, TATCHA commits to resolve complaints about our processing of your Personal Data. European Union and Swiss Users with inquiries or complaints regarding this Privacy Policy should first contact TATCHA as follows:
TATCHA, Attention: Legal
1517 North Point St., #533, San Francisco, CA 94123
We have further committed to refer unresolved Privacy Shield complaints to an alternative dispute resolution provider. If you have an unresolved privacy or data use concern that we have not addressed satisfactorily, please contact our U.S.-based third party dispute resolution provider JAMS (free of charge) at https://www.jamsadr.com/eu-us-privacy-shield. TATCHA will cooperate with JAMS pursuant to the JAMS International Mediation Rules, available on the JAMS website at www.jamsadr.com/international-mediation-rules.
If your complaint is not resolved through these channels, under certain conditions a binding arbitration option may be available before a Privacy Shield Panel. For additional information, please visit: https://www.privacyshield.gov/article?id=ANNEX-I-introduction.
We are subject to the investigatory and enforcement powers of the Federal Trade Commission with respect to Personal Data received or transferred pursuant to the Frameworks.
International Users
TATCHA is based in the United States and we transfer your Personal Data to the United States for the purposes described in this Privacy Policy. The United States may have data protection laws less stringent than or otherwise different from the laws in effect in the country in which you are located. For EU and Swiss Users, we are certified to the Privacy Shield Frameworks (as described in the “Privacy Shield” Section above) and some of our service providers (such as Google Inc. and Amazon Web Services) are also certified to the Privacy Shield Frameworks. We take steps to ensure that your Personal Data receives an adequate level of security protection where it is processed and your rights continue to be protected. For more information, please contact us as described below.
CONTACT US
If you have any questions about our Privacy Policy or the information practices of the Site, please feel free to contact us at privacy@tatcha.com.







Terms of Sale

for Tatcha consumers
This Terms of Sale Agreement (this “Agreement”) is a legal agreement between you (“User” or “you”) and Tatcha, LLC (“Tatcha” or “we” or “our”) that governs the sale of goods and orders placed via this e-commerce website. Tatcha may amend this Agreement at any time. User’s submission of an order at this website constitutes acceptance of the terms of sale stated at the time of order. You are encouraged to review payment terms and the terms of this Agreement at the time of your order.

payment terms
Payment terms can be changed by Tatcha without notice to you. The payment terms in effect when an order is received will apply to that order. You are encouraged to review payment terms at the time of your order. Tatcha does not provide price protection or refunds in the event of price decreases or promotions not in effect at the time of your order.
Tatcha may enlist the aid of third parties to assist in the collection of delinquent accounts. All reasonable costs incurred by Tatcha arising from attempts to collect delinquent accounts will be charged to User.

product availability, product information and color display
The availability of the products described on the e-commerce website, and the descriptions of such products, may vary based on location and timing.
The information presented on or through the e-commerce website, including personalized product recommendations provided in response to your submissions or answers to quizzes, and ingredient lists, is made available solely for general information purposes. We do not warrant the accuracy, completeness or usefulness of this information and any reliance you place on such information for placing an order for products is strictly at your own risk. We disclaim all liability and responsibility arising from any reliance placed on such materials by you or any other visitor to the e-commerce website, or by anyone who may be informed of any of its contents.
The display of product colors may be affected by the particular technical specifications and settings of your computer, or other device from which you access the e-commerce website, and the actual colors of the product may not be accurately displayed.

freight terms
Tatcha reserves the right to choose the freight carrier on prepaid shipments and charge a 20% service restocking charge on all orders not accepted for delivery.

damage and shortage policy
All shipments are packed with great care. Any damages or shortages (including latent damages) must be reported by User to Tatcha Customer Service within 48 hours of User’s receipt of shipment.

returns, refunds, deductions
Upon receipt, it is your obligation to inspect the shipment. You will be deemed to accept any shipment unless you notify us of any damages, shortages (including latent damages) or a return request. Returns, refunds or deductions will only be granted in accordance with the  Returns Policy. If no such action is taken, we shall not be obligated to accept any rejection of the goods in the shipment at a later date.

orders, prohibition on reselling
The receipt of an email order confirmation does not constitute our acceptance of an order or our confirmation of an offer to sell a product. We reserve the right, without prior notice, to limit the order quantity on any product and/or to refuse service to you. We also may require verification of information prior to the acceptance and/or shipment of any order.
The prices displayed on the site are quoted in U.S. dollars and are intended to be valid and effective only in the United States. The products made available on the e-commerce site are intended for personal use. You may not sell or resell any products or services that you purchase or receive from us. We have the right to refuse or cancel orders placed, including but not limited to orders where any products are listed at an incorrect price regardless of whether the order has been confirmed or your credit card charged. If your credit card has already been charged for the purchase and your order is canceled, we will issue a credit to your credit card account.

auto-delivery program
If you participate in our auto-refill program, the following terms and conditions apply specifically to your participation in this program:

Participation will continue until cancelled. You may cancel your participation in the program at any time by cancelling the order from within your Tatcha account. We may, in our sole discretion, terminate your participation in the program at any time without notice to you.
You can cancel an upcoming order up to 24 hours before the upcoming order date from your Tatcha account.
A recurring charge will be automatically charged to your credit card at the time of each successive shipment. Product selection and the shipment frequency will be in accordance with your preferences elected at the time of program registration or as modified by you from time to time in your account.
You are obligated to provide current, complete, and accurate information for your billing account. You are responsible for promptly updating all information to keep your billing account current, complete, and accurate (e.g., change in billing address, credit card number, or credit card expiration date). You must promptly notify us if your credit card information is cancelled or is no longer valid (e.g., loss or theft of your credit card). Changes to such information can be made from your Tatcha account. Add the new card and select it as the default credit card. 














































































































































































































































