Document Name: role of Cocoa Butter in Massage Cream0
Document link: https://www.massagemag.com/why-you-should-use-cocoa-butter-massage-cream-33038/













Why You Should Use Cocoa Butter - MASSAGE Magazine














































































































Home
About
Subscribe

Subscriber Login
E-News


Insurance Plus Login
 





Menu








 

 


Massage Insurance

Massage Therapy Insurance
Reiki Insurance
Bodyworker Insurance
Policy Details
Health Insurance
Get Insured


CEUs

Massage CEUs
CE Resource Guide


News

Massage News
COVID-19
Press Releases
Sponsored Editorials


Practice

Clientele
State Massage Laws
Practice Building
Research
Self-Care
Technique


Resources

Careers
Kinesiology Taping and LMT Tools
Insurance Guide
Massage Creams
MBLEx REVIEW
MASSAGE CE
Massage Modalities
Massage Tables
Pregnancy and Infant Massage
Topical Pain Relief


Education

Webinars
Massage eBooks
Guide to Massage School
Students
Videos


Events

Post Event
Become an Events Poster


Products

Products Directory
Submit a Product
Vendor Login
Get Insured Today
Subscribe Today


Advertise

Media Kit
Upload Advertising
Contact Us


Get Insured
 



HomeResource CentersMassage & Spa Topical Products









Why You Should Use Cocoa Butter
December 26, 2016Phyllis HanlonMassage & Spa Topical Products 






Cocoa originated in South America, according to the International Cocoa Organization (ICO).
Evidence shows Mayan traders enjoyed the bean in liquid form as early as 400 B.C. In fact, the Aztec culture emphasized the “sanctity of cacao.” The ICO also indicates that Christopher Columbus was the first person outside of South America to imbibe and Hernan Cortés brought the drink recipe back to Spain with him.
Today, the cocoa bean has found a place on store shelves in the form of chocolate bars and as a key ingredient in hot chocolate drinks. Thanks to Conrad Von Houten who invented the cocoa press in 1828, the product became available in butter form. This allowed it to be used in diverse products, including massage creams.

 
Moisturizing Power
Jean Shea, CEO and founder of BIOTONE, notes that cocoa butter is “a versatile, smooth-textured natural fat derived from the cocoa bean,” which makes it the “ultimate moisturizer.” She adds, cocoa butter is rich in Vitamin E and other important vitamins and minerals. It not only hydrates the skin and protects skin from harsh environmental conditions that might cause dryness and promote aging.
 
Research for Cocoa Butter
A 2014 review supports Shea’s claims. According to the authors, “a growing body of evidence from clinical and bench research has begun to provide scientific validation for the use of cocoa-derived phytochemicals as an effective approach for skin protection.”
The review notes that cocoa contains a number of healthy agents, including plant polyphenols, which have anti-inflammatory, immunodulatory (i.e., it can modify or regulate one or more immune functions) and DNA repair properties. They also may help skin that has been overexposed ultraviolet radiation from the sun.
Additionally, the presence of the botanical agent theobromine “…stimulates the heart muscle, relaxes bronchial smooth muscles in the lungs and plays an important role in the transmission of intracellular signals,” meaning that it stimulates antioxidant activity.
Cocoa beans are rich in magnesium, copper and potassium, which “…may affect vascular health and function,” according to the review. In spite of these encouraging findings, the authors caution that more studies are needed to “…determine the possible synergistic interaction…” among its many bioactive compounds.
 
Cocoa Butter May Not Affect Stretch Marks
Indeed, earlier claims that cocoa butter helps reduce stretch marks have not held to scientific scrutiny. A 2008 study examined the effect of cocoa butter lotion on the development of stretch marks on the abdomen, breasts and thighs.
Of 175 first-time mothers, 91 received cocoa butter lotion and 84 were in a control group. They found that patients using the cocoa butter treatment had no difference in likelihood of getting stretch marks compared to the control group.
 
Client Experience
Cocoa butter creams and lotions still delivers a pleasant experience for your clients. The scent is recognizable and Shea says, “in terms of its use for skin care and massage products, cocoa butter easily absorbs into the skin. It provides smooth glide and extended workability and is good for all modalities.”
Shea reminds massage therapists to check with clients to see if they are allergic to cocoa before using this product.
 
 
 










 How to Have Five-Star Customer Service in Your Spa Make Sure You Get Enough Vitamin D






×Close




Search



 
Current Issue 
What’s inside?

 Massage in Pain Management
Trigger Points & Myofascial Pain Syndrome
Address Pain with CrainoSacral Therapy
SPECIAL: Body Mechanics for the Pregnant MT
Pediatric Massage: Give Children a Voice in Their Health Care
Thai Massage

» View Current Issue





Join 250,000+ Massage Therapists
Get our latest news, articles, techniques, and self-care delivered to your email inbox.
















Sign Up










 
 
Free Download






Trending Articles 




 



The Jacquelyn Project: Don’t Overlook Tools

1 






 



Massage News for Today’s MT

1 






 



The Fit MT: The Right Body Mechanics Can Help You Work During Pregnancy

1 






 



Advanced Business Strategies: How to Sell a Massage Business

1 



Connect With Us 

















Home
About Us
Massage Insurance
Massage CEUs
Contact Us
Subscribe
Continuing Education
Advertise
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
 

DIGITAL SUBSCRIPTIONSign up to receive free digital issues of MASSAGE Magazine directly to your mailbox. 


3948 3rd Street South #279Jacksonville Beach, FL 32250P: 904.285.6020    



Privacy Policy & Terms of Service | Comment Policy | Copyright © 2023
Insurance Plus is included as a member benefit of Protection Plan Association, Inc., an association for health, wellness and beauty professionals and students created for the purpose of providing valuable and important benefits and services to its members. Insurance Plus is not an insurer.













×Close




Search


































































