Document Name: role of BHA in Cover Cream0
Document link: https://www.skinmedica.com/us/product-category/brighteners/94929.html









AHA BHA Cream | SkinMedica®






































































Skip to Content (Press Enter)


Skip to Footer (Press Enter)







    Your browser does not have JS enabled, you are still able to browse the website but you won't be able to access advanced features such as editing or logging in.
    








    You are using an unsupported browser or your browser might be in the Compatibility View mode
    






    Your cookies are disabled. To experience the full world of  SkinMedica®, please enable these or check whether another program is blocking them. By enabling them, you are agreeing to our Cookie policy


















                Free shipping on all orders
                


























                            Shop Skin Care
                        



                            Find a Provider
                        



                            Rewards Program
                        

































                My Account
            

/


                Register
            





































            Log In
        
















                                    Shop by:
                                


                                                        
                                                            Product Category
                                                        
                                                        










Facial Cleansers






Moisturizers






Correction






Brighteners






Sunscreens






Targeted Treatments






Post-Procedure






Kits & Systems





                                                                    View All Products
                                                                















 View More







                                                        
                                                            Skin Concern
                                                        
                                                        










Texture






Acne & Blemishes






Aging






Elasticity & Sagging






Fine Line & Wrinkles






Sun Protection






Sun Damage






Dullness/Hyperpigmentation





                                                                    View All Products
                                                                















 View More







                                                        
                                                            Skin Type
                                                        
                                                        










Normal Skin






Dry Skin






Oily Skin






Sensitive Skin






Combination Skin






Post Procedure





                                                                    View All Products
                                                                















 View More







                                                    Best Sellers
                                                




                Why SkinMedica®?
            


                        Accolades & Accreditations
                    



                        Evolution & Innovation
                    





Professional Peels










Find a Provider













Rewards Program











Allergan Aesthetics
















































                            Home
                        






                            Product Category
                        






                            Brighteners
                        






                            AHA BHA Cream
                        









































































                    Previous
                
   Next
                    







































                    Pinch
                
                to Zoom
            


















































                SKU
                94929





            AHA/BHA Cream
        








    
    $48.00

















                        Receive complimentary Ultra Hydrating Sheet Masks (set of 3) when you spend $250 or more on SkinMedica products.
                    

                        Learn More
                    










For all skin types





TSA Friendly





                Exfoliates and improves the appearance of skin tone and texture revealing brighter skin.
            

                Store at room temperature 15°C - 30°C (59°F - 86°F).
            






                        +48
                        Allē points







                                Allē Members earn 48 Allē points with this purchase.
                            






            
                Net Weight:
            
        



                    2 Oz.  /  56.7 g
                    












            One Time Purchase
        

            Auto-replenish Order
        





Auto-replenishment is active for this product. Manage auto-replenishment settings in My Account at any time.




+ Every 30 Days
+ Every 45 Days
+ Every 60 Days
+ Every 90 Days









Save with auto-replenish orders and automatically receive a
                    10% discount and FREE gift on your first order.


Future auto-replenish orders can be delayed or canceled at any time.












            Quantity
        






































        
            
                Add to Bag
            
        
    


    Notify Me When Available















                    Find a Provider
                









            AHA/BHA Cream
        




    
    $48.00












            Quantity
        






































        
            
                Add to Bag
            
        
    


    Notify Me When Available










                    Find a Provider
                















Key Benefits


                    Exfoliates skin
                

                    Reveals a more youthful appearance
                

                    Enhances skin tone and texture
                






Key Ingredients


Lactic Acid, Glycolic Acid, Citric Acid, and Malic Acid:
Each is a natural, alpha-hydroxy acid (AHA) derived from bilberry extract, sugar cane extract, sugar maple extract, and citrus extracts that provides mild exfoliation to help reduce the appearance of wrinkles and enhance skin texture.

Salicylic Acid:
A beta-hydroxy acid (BHA) that helps exfoliate skin.


Tocopheryl Acetate:
A stabilized ester of vitamin E considered the most important antioxidant and free-radical scavenger.

Panthenol (Pro-Vitamin B5):
A moisturizing agent that binds moisture to surface skin layers.


Ingredients

           Water/Aqua/Eau, Vaccinium Myrtillus Fruit Extract, Aloe Barbadensis Leaf Juice, Cetyl Ethylhexanoate, Glycerin,
Cetyl Alcohol, Glyceryl Stearate, PEG-100 Stearate, Squalane, Saccharum Officinarum (Sugar Cane) Extract,
Dimethicone, Stearic Acid, Magnesium Aluminum Silicate, Citrus Aurantium Dulcis (Orange) Fruit Extract, Citrus
Limon (Lemon) Fruit Extract, Acer Saccharum (Sugar Maple) Extract, Salicylic Acid, Althaea Officinalis Root
Extract, Chamomilla Recutita (Matricaria) Flower Extract, Hydrolyzed Soy Protein, Tocopheryl Acetate, Ascorbyl
Palmitate, Panthenol, Bisabolol, Polysorbate 20, Polyacrylate-13, Polyisobutene, Butylene Glycol, Xanthan Gum,
Aminomethyl Propanol, Phenoxyethanol, Ethylhexylglycerin, Potassium Sorbate
        








How to use


When to Apply
Apply twice daily after cleansing, toning, and applying treatment products.


Where to Apply
Apply to your entire face, (neck and chest if desired).


How to Apply
Apply a small amount to face and gently massage into skin.




Sunburn Alert
Because this product contains alpha-hydroxy acids (AHA), it may increase your skin's sensitivity to sunburn. Use a sunscreen and limit sun exposure while using this product and for a week following discontinuation.













Behind the Formula: Why it Works



 
                                    Naturally Derived Ingredients


                                    Naturally derived alpha-hydroxy acid (AHA) combined with beta-hydroxy acid (BHA) help exfoliate skin, reduce the appearance of wrinkles, and enhance skin texture.
                                














Additional Information


How long to use?
You can use AHA/BHA Cream as long as needed to improve the overall condition of your skin.


What is special about this product?
This product has a combination of both alpha-hydroxy and beta-hydroxy acids to help exfoliate the skin and reveal a more youthful appearance.










                Recommended Products
            














































        
            
                Add to Bag
            
        
    





        TNS® Advanced+ Serum
    


            1 Oz.  /  28.4 g
        



    
    $295.00





                Find a Provider
            







































        
            
                Add to Bag
            
        
    





        HA⁵® Rejuvenating Hydrator 2 Oz.
    


            2 Oz.  /  56.7 g
        



    
    $184.00





                Find a Provider
            







































        
            
                Add to Bag
            
        
    





        Lytera® 2.0 Pigment Correcting Serum
    


            2 Fl. Oz.  /  60 mL
        



    
    $160.00





                Find a Provider
            







































        
            
                Add to Bag
            
        
    





        Neck Correct Cream
    


            2 Oz.  /  56.7 g
        



    
    $135.00





                Find a Provider
            






































        
            
                Add to Bag
            
        
    





        TNS Eye Repair®



            0.5 Oz.  /  14.2 g
        



    
    $106.00





                Find a Provider
            






































        
            
                Add to Bag
            
        
    





        AHA/BHA Exfoliating Cleanser
    


            6 Fl. Oz.  /  177.4 mL
        



    
    $48.00





                Find a Provider
            


























Allē Rewards Program
Discover




Free Shipping




Find a Provider
Discover

















Contact Us
Accolades & Accreditations
SkinMedica.Com Returns






























Uncover what your skin needsSubscribe me to receive marketing offers and updates from SkinMedica®.
    







            Subscribe
        









Contact Us
Accolades & Accreditations
SkinMedica.Com Returns








Unauthorized Dealers
Careers
About SkinMedica®








    Allergan Portfolio Brands
    




































FAQs


Track Your Order


Terms & Conditions


Privacy Policy


Terms of Use


Cookies Settings










Secure Shopping




© 2023 AbbVie. All rights reserved. SkinMedica® and its design are trademarks of Allergan, Inc., an AbbVie company.


PRT151121 11/21





CAUTION: Do not use Retinol Complex if you are pregnant, lactating, or planning to become pregnant. Mild redness, peeling, and irritation are expected when using this product. Use a sunscreen and limit sun exposure while using this product and for a week following discontinuation.
    
Sunburn alert: AHA/BHA Exfoliating Cleanser, AHA/BHA Cream, and Rejuvenative Toner contain an alpha-hydroxy acid (AHA) that may increase your skin’s sensitivity to the sun and particularly the possibility of sunburn. Use a sunscreen, wear protective clothing, and limit sun exposure while using these products and for a week following discontinuation.
    
Important! Sunscreen is required to optimize and maintain the results of using Lytera® 2.0 Pigment Correcting Serum.
    
Most SkinMedica® products are intended to meet the FDA’s definition of a cosmetic product, an article applied to the human body to cleanse, beautify, promote attractiveness, and alter appearances. These SkinMedica® products are not intended to be drug products that diagnose, treat, cure, or prevent any disease or condition. These products have not been approved by the FDA, and the statements here have not been evaluated by the FDA.
    
SkinMedica® TOTAL DEFENSE + REPAIR Broad Spectrum Sunscreens (SPF 34, SPF 34 Tinted, and SPF 50+) and Essential Defense Broad Spectrum Sunscreens (Everyday Clear SPF 47, Mineral Shield™ Tinted SPF 32, and Mineral Shield™ SPF 35) are over-the-counter drug products that are formulated and marketed pursuant to the FDA’s governing regulations set forth at 21 CFR Part 352.
    
The PA rating system is used in Japan to classify UVA protection and is not an FDA requirement on sunscreens sold in the U.S.
    
SkinMedica® Purifying Foaming Wash is an over-the-counter drug product that is formulated and marketed pursuant to the FDA’s governing regulations set forth at 21 CFR Part 333 Subpart D.
    
Not all products are available in Canada. Subject to change at any time without prior notice.
    



































Clear











































































