Document Name: role of Preservative in Cream1
Document link: https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9284/9/3/59








Cosmetics | Free Full-Text | The Role of Preservatives and Multifunctionals on the Oxidation of Cosmetic O/W Emulsions










































































































Next Article in Journal
A Review of Moisturizers; History, Preparation, Characterization and Applications







Previous Article in Journal
Effects of Structure on the Solubility of UV Filters








Journals




Active Journals
Find a Journal
Proceedings Series





Topics



Information




For Authors
For Reviewers
For Editors
For Librarians
For Publishers
For Societies
For Conference Organizers


Open Access Policy
Institutional Open Access Program
Special Issues Guidelines
Editorial Process
Research and Publication Ethics
Article Processing Charges
Awards
Testimonials





Author Services



Initiatives




Sciforum
MDPI Books
Preprints.org
Scilit
SciProfiles
Encyclopedia
JAMS
Proceedings Series






About




Overview
Contact
Careers
News
Blog






Sign In / Sign Up





Notice





You can make submissions to other journals
here.




clear





Notice

You are accessing a machine-readable page. In order to be human-readable, please install an RSS reader.





Continue
Cancel



clear




All articles published by MDPI are made immediately available worldwide under an open access license. No special
permission is required to reuse all or part of the article published by MDPI, including figures and tables. For
articles published under an open access Creative Common CC BY license, any part of the article may be reused without
permission provided that the original article is clearly cited. For more information, please refer to
https://www.mdpi.com/openaccess.




Feature papers represent the most advanced research with significant potential for high impact in the field. A Feature
Paper should be a substantial original Article that involves several techniques or approaches, provides an outlook for
future research directions and describes possible research applications.


Feature papers are submitted upon individual invitation or recommendation by the scientific editors and must receive
positive feedback from the reviewers.




Editor’s Choice articles are based on recommendations by the scientific editors of MDPI journals from around the world.
Editors select a small number of articles recently published in the journal that they believe will be particularly
interesting to readers, or important in the respective research area. The aim is to provide a snapshot of some of the
most exciting work published in the various research areas of the journal.





                        You seem to have javascript disabled. Please note that many of the page functionalities won't work as expected without javascript enabled.
                    












clear


search


menu


















Journals







Active Journals
 



Find a Journal




Proceedings Series









Topics


Information






For Authors


For Reviewers


For Editors


For Librarians


For Publishers


For Societies


For Conference Organizers






Open Access Policy


Institutional Open Access Program


Special Issues Guidelines


Editorial Process


Research and Publication Ethics


Article Processing Charges


Awards


Testimonials








Author Services


Initiatives







 Sciforum




MDPI Books




Preprints.org




Scilit




SciProfiles




Encyclopedia




JAMS




Proceedings Series









About







Overview




Contact




Careers




News




Blog












Sign In / Sign Up
Submit




 





 

Search for Articles:




Title / Keyword





Author / Affiliation / Email





Journal


All Journals

Acoustics


Actuators


Administrative Sciences


Adolescents


Advances in Respiratory Medicine


Aerospace


Agriculture


AgriEngineering


Agrochemicals


Agronomy


AI


Air


Algorithms


Allergies


Alloys


Analytica


Analytics


Anatomia


Anesthesia Research


Animals


Antibiotics


Antibodies


Antioxidants


Applied Biosciences


Applied Mechanics


Applied Microbiology


Applied Nano


Applied Sciences


Applied System Innovation (ASI)


AppliedChem


AppliedMath


Aquaculture Journal


Architecture


Arthropoda


Arts


Astronomy


Atmosphere


Atoms


Audiology Research


Automation


Axioms


Bacteria


Batteries


Behavioral Sciences


Beverages


Big Data and Cognitive Computing (BDCC)


BioChem


Bioengineering


Biologics


Biology


Biology and Life Sciences Forum


Biomass


Biomechanics


BioMed


Biomedicines


BioMedInformatics


Biomimetics


Biomolecules


Biophysica


Biosensors


BioTech


Birds


Blockchains


Brain Sciences


Buildings


Businesses


C


Cancers


Cardiogenetics


Catalysts


Cells


Ceramics


Challenges


ChemEngineering


Chemistry


Chemistry Proceedings


Chemosensors


Children


Chips


CivilEng


Clean Technologies (Clean Technol.)


Climate


Clinical and Translational Neuroscience (CTN)


Clinics and Practice


Clocks & Sleep


  Coasts


Coatings


Colloids and Interfaces


Colorants


Commodities


Complications


Compounds


Computation


Computer Sciences & Mathematics Forum


Computers


Condensed Matter


Conservation


Construction Materials


Corrosion and Materials Degradation (CMD)


Cosmetics


COVID


Crops


Cryptography


Crystals


Current Issues in Molecular Biology (CIMB)


Current Oncology


Dairy


Data


Dentistry Journal


Dermato


Dermatopathology


Designs


Diabetology


Diagnostics


Dietetics


Digital


Disabilities


Diseases


Diversity


DNA


Drones


Drugs and Drug Candidates (DDC)


Dynamics


Earth


Ecologies


Econometrics


Economies


Education Sciences


Electricity


Electrochem


Electronic Materials


Electronics


Encyclopedia


Endocrines


Energies


Eng


Engineering Proceedings


Entropy


Environmental Sciences Proceedings


Environments


Epidemiologia


Epigenomes


European Burn Journal (EBJ)


European Journal of Investigation in Health, Psychology and Education (EJIHPE)


Fermentation


Fibers


FinTech


Fire


Fishes


Fluids


Foods


Forecasting


Forensic Sciences


Forests


Fossils


Foundations


Fractal and Fractional (Fractal Fract)


Fuels


Future


Future Internet


Future Pharmacology


Future Transportation


Galaxies


Games


Gases


Gastroenterology Insights


Gastrointestinal Disorders


Gastronomy


Gels


Genealogy


Genes


Geographies


GeoHazards


Geomatics


Geosciences


Geotechnics


Geriatrics


Gout, Urate, and Crystal Deposition Disease (GUCDD)


Grasses


Hardware


Healthcare


Hearts


Hemato


Hematology Reports


Heritage


Histories


Horticulturae


Hospitals


Humanities


Humans


Hydrobiology


Hydrogen


Hydrology


Hygiene


Immuno


Infectious Disease Reports


Informatics


Information


Infrastructures


Inorganics


Insects


Instruments


International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health (IJERPH)


International Journal of Financial Studies (IJFS)


International Journal of Molecular Sciences (IJMS)


International Journal of Neonatal Screening (IJNS)


International Journal of Plant Biology (IJPB)


International Journal of Translational Medicine (IJTM)


International Journal of Turbomachinery, Propulsion and Power (IJTPP)


International Medical Education (IME)


Inventions


IoT


ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information (IJGI)


J


Journal of Ageing and Longevity (JAL)


Journal of Cardiovascular Development and Disease (JCDD)


Journal of Clinical & Translational Ophthalmology (JCTO)


Journal of Clinical Medicine (JCM)


Journal of Composites Science (J. Compos. Sci.)


Journal of Cybersecurity and Privacy (JCP)


Journal of Developmental Biology (JDB)
 

Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Analyses (JETA)


Journal of Functional Biomaterials (JFB)


Journal of Functional Morphology and Kinesiology (JFMK)


Journal of Fungi (JoF)


Journal of Imaging (J. Imaging)


Journal of Intelligence (J. Intell.)


Journal of Low Power Electronics and Applications (JLPEA)


Journal of Manufacturing and Materials Processing (JMMP)


Journal of Marine Science and Engineering (JMSE)


Journal of Molecular Pathology (JMP)


Journal of Nanotheranostics (JNT)


Journal of Nuclear Engineering (JNE)


Journal of Otorhinolaryngology, Hearing and Balance Medicine (OHBM)


Journal of Personalized Medicine (JPM)


Journal of Respiration (JoR)


Journal of Risk and Financial Management (JRFM)


Journal of Sensor and Actuator Networks (JSAN)


Journal of Theoretical and Applied Electronic Commerce Research (JTAER)


Journal of Vascular Diseases (JVD)


Journal of Xenobiotics (JoX)


Journal of Zoological and Botanical Gardens (JZBG)


Journalism and Media


Kidney and Dialysis


Kinases and Phosphatases


Knowledge


Land


Languages


Laws


Life


Liquids


Literature


Livers


Logics


Logistics


Lubricants


Lymphatics


Machine Learning and Knowledge Extraction (MAKE)


Machines


Macromol


Magnetism


Magnetochemistry


Marine Drugs


Materials


Materials Proceedings


Mathematical and Computational Applications (MCA)


Mathematics


Medical Sciences


Medical Sciences Forum


Medicina


Medicines


Membranes


Merits


Metabolites


Metals


Meteorology


Methane


Methods and Protocols (MPs)


Metrology


Micro


Microbiology Research


Micromachines


Microorganisms


Microplastics


Minerals


Mining


Modelling


Molbank


Molecules


Multimodal Technologies and Interaction (MTI)


Muscles


Nanoenergy Advances


Nanomanufacturing


Nanomaterials


NDT


Network


Neuroglia


Neurology International


NeuroSci


Nitrogen


Non-Coding RNA (ncRNA)


Nursing Reports


Nutraceuticals


Nutrients


Obesities


Oceans


Onco


Optics


Oral


Organics


Organoids


Osteology


Oxygen


Parasitologia


Particles


Pathogens


Pathophysiology


Pediatric Reports


Pharmaceuticals


Pharmaceutics


Pharmacoepidemiology


Pharmacy


Philosophies


Photochem


Photonics


Phycology


Physchem


Physical Sciences Forum


Physics


Physiologia


Plants


Plasma


Platforms


Pollutants


Polymers


Polysaccharides


Poultry


Powders


Proceedings


Processes


Prosthesis


Proteomes


Psych


Psychiatry International


Psychoactives


Publications


Quantum Beam Science (QuBS)


Quantum Reports


Quaternary


Radiation


Reactions


Receptors


Recycling


Religions


Remote Sensing


Reports


Reproductive Medicine (Reprod. Med.)


Resources


Rheumato


Risks


Robotics


Ruminants


Safety


Sci


Scientia Pharmaceutica (Sci. Pharm.)


Sclerosis


Seeds


Sensors


Separations


Sexes


Signals


Sinusitis


Smart Cities


Social Sciences


Societies


Software


Soil Systems


Solar


Solids


Spectroscopy Journal


Sports


Standards


Stats


Stresses


Surfaces


Surgeries


Surgical Techniques Development


Sustainability


Sustainable Chemistry


Symmetry


SynBio


Systems


Targets


Taxonomy


Technologies


Telecom


Textiles


Thalassemia Reports


Thermo


Tomography


Tourism and Hospitality


Toxics


Toxins


Transplantology


Trauma Care


Trends in Higher Education


Tropical Medicine and Infectious Disease (TropicalMed)


Universe


Urban Science


Uro


Vaccines


Vehicles


Venereology


Veterinary Sciences


Vibration


Virtual Worlds


Viruses


Vision


Waste


Water


Wind


Women


World


World Electric Vehicle Journal (WEVJ)


Youth


Zoonotic Diseases





Article Type


All Article Types
Article
Review
Communication
Editorial
Book Review
Brief Report
Case Report
Comment
Commentary
Concept Paper
Conference Report
Correction
Creative
Data Descriptor
Discussion
Entry
Essay
Expression of Concern
Extended Abstract
Guidelines
Hypothesis
Interesting Images
Letter
New Book Received
Obituary
Opinion
Perspective
Proceeding Paper
Project Report
Protocol
Registered Report
Reply
Retraction
Short Note
Study Protocol
Systematic Review
Technical Note
Tutorial
Viewpoint



 



 
Advanced Search





 


Section







Special Issue






Volume



Issue



Number



Page










 

Logical OperatorOperator

AND
OR



Search Text



Search Type

All fields
Title
Abstract
Keywords
Authors
Affiliations
Doi
Full Text
References



 


add_circle_outline




remove_circle_outline




 







 


Journals


Cosmetics


Volume 9


Issue 3


10.3390/cosmetics9030059












Submit to this Journal


Review for this Journal


Edit a Special Issue




►
▼
Article Menu




Article Menu



Academic Editor





Enzo Berardesca






Subscribe SciFeed


Recommended Articles


Related Info Link



Google Scholar





More by Authors Links



on DOAJ




Springer, A.



Ziegler, H.





on Google Scholar




Springer, A.



Ziegler, H.





on PubMed




Springer, A.



Ziegler, H.









/ajax/scifeed/subscribe







Article Views







Citations
-









Table of Contents
















Altmetric


share
Share


announcement
Help


format_quote
Cite


question_answer
Discuss in SciProfiles


thumb_up

...

Endorse


textsms

...

Comment





Need Help?


Support

Find support for a specific problem in the support section of our website.


Get Support



Feedback

Please let us know what you think of our products and services.


Give Feedback



Information

Visit our dedicated information section to learn more about MDPI.


Get Information




clear







JSmol Viewer







clear








first_page


settings


Order Article Reprints







Font Type:


Arial
Georgia
Verdana





Font Size:

Aa
Aa
Aa







Line Spacing:















Column Width:

















Background:


















Open AccessArticle

The Role of Preservatives and Multifunctionals on the Oxidation of Cosmetic O/W Emulsions 


by
Arielle Springer * and Helena Ziegler







Fraunhofer Institute for Process Engineering and Packaging IVV, Giggenhauser Straße 35, D-85354 Freising, Germany


*
Author to whom correspondence should be addressed. 




Cosmetics 2022, 9(3), 59; https://doi.org/10.3390/cosmetics9030059


Received: 3 May 2022
/
Revised: 25 May 2022
/
Accepted: 31 May 2022
/
Published: 7 June 2022




Download


Download PDF

Download PDF with Cover

Download XML

Download Epub



Browse Figures









Review Reports
Versions Notes








Abstract:
Preservatives are typically used to protect cosmetic products from microbial spoilage. However, there is evidence that some preservatives can increase oxidation in O/W emulsions. This could have disadvantages for product quality, efficacy, and consumer health and well-being. Therefore, the impact of preservatives or multifunctionals on oxidation should be quantified. For this purpose, five O/W emulsions with different preservatives were prepared and stored. During storage, the oxygen concentration in the headspace of the samples was studied. The samples showed significant differences in their oxygen uptake and daily oxygen consumption rate. Thus, the preservatives used in this study had an influence on oxidation.


Keywords: oxygen uptake; oxygen consumption; antimicrobial; pro-oxidant; shelf life












 1. IntroductionIn recent years, synthetic preservatives such as parabens have fallen strongly into disrepute and have been dismissed by many consumers [1]. This is one possible factor for the steadily increasing demand for natural cosmetic products [2]. Although the type and concentration of preservatives are severely limited in natural cosmetic products, even in them substances have to be used to protect the products and consumers, especially in O/W emulsions.O/W emulsions are dispersed systems composed of an outer water phase and a dispersed oil phase with emollients responsible for tactile perception and skin efficacy [3,4]. To prevent the separation of these non-mixable components, amphiphilic surface-active molecules—emulsifiers—are required [5]. An O/W emulsion is characterized by being water-soluble, cooling, and not oily. Despite the fact that emulsions are prone to flocculation, coalescence, or separation of the phases during storage [6,7], their quality can also be limited by the growth of microorganisms in the large water phase [8]. For example, bacteria, yeasts, and molds can enter the product after opening the packaging through contact with the finger, as well as exposure to air. Therefore, preservatives are used to prevent the growth of microorganisms [9]. In general, a preservative should have a broad spectrum of activity, sufficient solubility in water, and a pH-independent spectrum of activity, and should not interact with other ingredients [10]. Table 1 shows some selected natural preservatives, their respective pH range of action, water solubility, preservation spectrum, and the maximum permissible amount that may be used in the preparation of the various O/W-emulsion-based cosmetic formulations.While preservatives protect cosmetic products microbially, the bulk can still degrade due to oxidation. Oxidative changes in the lipid phase are mostly due to autoxidation processes of natural emollients. Like in most vegetable oils, these reactions are responsible for the formation of hydroperoxides and later carbonyl compounds, whereby the last mentioned can lead to a rancid off-flavor [17,18]. In particular, lipid hydroperoxides react with pro-oxidants from the aqueous phase to form radicals at the interface of the micelles, which subsequently trigger the oxidation of fatty acids inside the micelle [19]. The process of autoxidation is influenced by various factors, such as temperature, the composition of fatty acids, concentration and effectiveness of pro- and antioxidants, oxygen partial pressure, oxidation catalysts, such as heavy metal ions (e.g., copper, iron) and the redox-state [20]. The activity of the antioxidants decreases with lower the pH level, due to increased stability and solubility of the reduced transition metals responsible for pro-oxidant effects [21]. Some ingredients, such as citric acid, can form complexes with metal ions to prevent compounds from reacting with metals and forming peroxides [22], but others can even promote oxidation, as described for ascorbic acid [21]. It was already shown that the oxidation rate in O/W emulsions increases with the increasing content of unsaturated fatty acids [23]. However, the prediction of oxidation reactions in emulsions is not trivial due to numerous influencing factors, such as droplet size, interfaces, and oxidation kinetics [24]. During oxidation, degradation of the oxidation-sensitive unsaturated fatty acids occurs, which are known for their positive effect on the skin such as anti-inflammatory effect [25] or effect against atopic dermatitis [26,27]. The resulting oxidation products and free radicals have been shown to accelerate skin aging [28] and lead to skin damage [29,30]. The topical application of such oxidation products can damage the skin, especially the skin lubricant squalene [31,32]. Some food preservatives themselves tend to degrade tissues in the body faster than they rebuild and, therefore, can interfere with metabolism [33], which may be also possible for cosmetic preservatives and their effect on the skin. Besides natural oils and unsaturated fatty acids, also certain ingredients are sensitive to oxidation and can lose their effect during storage, such as ascorbic acid (vitamin C) [34], retinol (vitamin A1) [35], and ubiquinone (coenzyme Q10) [36]. Even if preservatives are not as much in the focus of the literature yet, there is evidence that some preservatives, while improving microbiological shelf life, can lead to altered oxidation of unsaturated fatty acids in the emulsion as well. In the following, five preservatives were examined in more detail: Phenethyl alcohol is a rose-scented substance that acts as a multifunctional on the one hand as a fragrance, but also as a fungicidal and bacteriostatic agent by inhibiting enzymes in bacteria and fungi [37,38]. It is photosensitive and can be synthetically oxidized to the corresponding aldehyde and further to acid [39]. This process has been described in organic synthesis in systems with two phases (organic and aqueous) [40], which suggests that it can be applied to O/W emulsions as well. Sorbic acid or its salts (sorbates) are currently used as an antimicrobial agent to prevent spoilage by mold, yeast, and fungi by interfering with various metabolic processes in the cell life cycle. Sorbic acid has a very high partition coefficient in the water phase, reaching microorganisms very well. However, it is oxidatively unstable in aqueous solutions depending on pH, the presence of other additives, and storage conditions [41,42]. As a result of this degradation, carbonyl compounds are formed, which can lead to undesirable changes in quality and acceptability [43]. A plausible reason would be that the unsaturated carbon bonds are able to bind oxygen. Sorbic acid showed a significant pro-oxidant effect in foods [44,45]. These processes are probably also transferable to cosmetic O/W emulsions. Ethanol has a very good preservative effect with a broad pH action spectrum, which is due to its non-specific protein denaturation effect against all types of microorganisms [9]. Ethanol is able to oxidize to acetaldehyde and acetic acid [46]. However, this process has little relevance for cosmetic emulsions. Furthermore, there are data that exclude an influence on fat oxidation in oils [47]. Benzyl alcohol has a pleasant fragrance and is frequently used as a preservative [48,49]. However, it is oxidatively unstable. The substance oxidizes in the presence of oxygen in an aqueous solution to benzaldehyde and further to benzoic acid, which acts against microorganisms [50,51]. Its bacteriostatic and fungistatic activity is based on the inhibitory effect on enzymes that degrade reactive oxygen species [52]. Benzoin derivatives can be problematic because they can react to carcinogenic benzene in the presence of hydroxyl radicals (e.g., from fat oxidation) and light [53,54]. Since these processes have already been described in foods [55], they are certainly also realistic in cosmetic emulsions. Glyceryl caprylate is known as multifunctional and acts as a natural preservative, but also as an emollient, emulsifier, and skin penetration enhancer [56,57]. The substance has a good effect on numerous bacteria, yeasts, and molds [58,59]. No evidence of pro-oxidant behavior could be found. This is due to the chemical structure, which does not contain any unsaturated bonds or free functional groups that preferentially undergo radical or oxidative reactions. This can also be assumed for emulsions. These data suggest an influence of preservatives and multifunctionals on the oxidation of emulsions. However, according to the knowledge of the authors, no study was found in the literature that systematically describes the effect of preservatives on the oxidation of emulsions. Therefore, there is a need to elaborate on this aspect with a comparable and reproducible experimental approach.For that reason, the aim of the study was to determine the role of these substances on the oxygen uptake and daily oxygen consumption rate of cosmetic formulations. For this purpose, O/W emulsions were chosen as matrices for incorporating the substances and measuring oxidation. These results can help to select preservatives and multifunctionals that avoid pro-oxidant effects in the future so that oxidation and its negative consequences on the quality in terms of efficacy of the products, skin health, and consumer acceptance and well-being can be prevented. 2. Materials and MethodsTo verify this effect, five formulations were prepared with the following natural preservatives: phenethyl alcohol, potassium sorbate, ethanol, benzyl alcohol, and glyceryl caprylate. It was not possible to prepare a blank value without preservatives, since the microbiological activity would have influenced the oxygen concentration in the headspace and prevented conclusions about oxidation. A method to sterilize the samples without significantly altering them, and thus, risking comparability was not known. For every preservative, one formulation was produced. The following ingredients were used: canola oil as emollient, glyceryl stearate SE as O/W emulsifier, xanthan gum as a stabilizer, pH regulator, and preservative. Double-distilled water was added to fill the difference to 100% since it was assumed, that the preservatives accumulate in the water phase due to their polar solubility and antimicrobial effect in the aqueous phase. The process involved suspending the thickener and emulsifier in the lipid phase and then homogenizing with the water phase heated to 80 °C at 17,000 rpm for one minute. After cooling while stirring, the pH was adjusted to 4.3, and the preservative was added by homogenizing at 17,000 rpm for one minute. Table 2 shows the formulations in detail.The samples were filled into vials with oxygen sensors as triplicate determinations and evacuated to 300 mbar for 30 s to remove air bubbles from the sample caused by the filling process. Next, the samples were sealed gas-tight. All these steps were performed in a sterile bank and allowed the most hygienic production possible. Subsequently, the products were stored for 96 days under accelerated conditions at 30 °C and commercial lightning (1000 lux, halogen, 6000 K). Light exposure was chosen since it leads to a higher oxygen uptake [60]. Since cosmetic products are, these conditions are transferable to practice. Cosmetic formulations are often developed for a storage period of 30 months, during which they are stored under illumination in the retail trade during the day in an often light-transmitting packaging. Therefore, using the Arrhenius equation, the storage chosen in this study might represent the first 5–6 months after production. Physical stability was assessed visually during the storage period, as previous rheological studies during product development and the recommendations of the ingredient manufacturers have shown stable formulations. The antimicrobial efficacy of preservatives in the used concentration ranges has already been approved by the ingredient manufacturers as well. These results could be applied to these applications. Microbial analysis was performed at the beginning of the storage. Individual microbiological challenge tests were not necessary here, since no additional microbial contamination or growth was expected due to the closed storage. After storage, all vials were analyzed using headspace gas analysis on their CO2 concentration as a marker for microbial activity [61]. The experimental measurement of the oxygen partial pressure of the headspace was carried out via chemical–optical sensors according to the literature [62,63]. The oxygen concentration in mbar in every vial with a defined weight of product was converted to the amount of oxygen in mg taken up by 100 g of product (oxygen uptake) and shown as a function of time for all developed formulations to visualize the oxygen sensitivity. Subsequently, the slope of the oxygen uptake over time was calculated into the oxygen intake in mg per 100 g of product per day of storage (oxygen consumption rate) and is shown as a bar chart as an indicator of the oxidation kinetics [64]. The experimental setup is shown in the following scheme (Figure 1). 3. Results and DiscussionThe rheological quality at the beginning of the measurement was stable and showed a glossy surface and smooth flow behavior of medium viscosity. It can be assumed that the matrix behaved in the same way for all variants since no visual change in stability was observed in terms of change in viscosity, surface area, or phase separation after storage. The aerobic mesophilic total viable count was <5.0 cfu/g emulsion at the beginning of the storage, which was below the detection limit. Microbial metabolites such as CO2 were below the detection limit of 0.1% in the headspace gas analysis in all vials after storage, which indicates that the possibly existing microorganisms have not multiplied. Therefore, it can be concluded that the samples were sufficiently preserved and oxygen was not consumed by respiring microorganisms. At the end of storage, it was observed that the oxygen sensors of almost all samples were intact and provided realistic results. One sample from the triple determination of phenethyl alcohol had to be excluded as an outlier due to leakage. The samples considered for evaluation showed average oxygen contents, which neither remained too close to atmospheric conditions nor approached zero absorbing the oxygen completely.Using the headspace oxygen concentration results and the product weight, the oxygen uptake in mg oxygen per 100 g product (mg O2/100 g) was calculated (Figure 2). The graph shows that the uptake of oxygen was greatest for the samples containing potassium sorbate and benzyl alcohol. The slope was very high at the beginning of the storage and flattened out during the later measurement points. Samples with ethanol and glyceryl caprylate remained constant and showed oxygen uptake around zero. Phenethyl alcohol was in the middle range but showed a slight decrease after initially strong oxygen uptake.It can be assumed that oxygen from the headspace was absorbed by the sample to form oxidation products due to the following reasons: Other oxygen-consuming reactions were unlikely since only unsaturated fatty acids in the lipid phase were able to absorb oxygen and microbial influences were excluded. Thus, the uptake of oxygen correlated directly with oxidation and the used preservative ingredient. As a result, oxidation can be assumed clearly for phenethyl alcohol, potassium sorbate, and benzyl alcohol. On the other hand, a decrease in oxygen uptake can be caused by a release of oxygen into the headspace by solved oxygen and air bubbles from the samples or from leaks in the seals of the vials. Due to the high gas barrier of the vial (glass), diffusion of oxygen through the vial material was basically not existent. It is unlikely that reactions had occurred that produce molecular oxygen. In all these cases, no oxidation would be measured. However, this affected only the samples with ethanol, where the oxygen uptake was below zero throughout the storage period. Although a slight increase in oxygen was measurable in the vials, oxidation was assumed to be not strong enough to compensate for this increase. The low oxygen uptake can be caused by the polarity change due to the high concentration of added ethanol since the ethanol content in the water phase has an influence on the solubility of oxygen [65,66]. As the transfer of oxygen through the water phase to the micelles is the limiting factor for oxidation, an altered oxygen solubility could have an impact on oxidation.For significance testing, a one-factor ANOVA with a significance level of 0.05 was applied to the oxygen uptake data after 96 days of storage. Mean values differed significantly (p-value = 0.0027). Afterward, a two-sample t-test (one-sided, with different variances) was used to test the significant differences between the two groups. The results are presented in Table 3. The oxidation of potassium sorbate was significantly higher than that of ethanol and glyceryl caprylate. The oxygen uptake of the variant with benzyl alcohol was significantly higher than with ethanol. Preservation with ethanol and glyceryl caprylate resulted in significantly lower oxidation than with potassium sorbate and benzyl alcohol. The other variants showed no significant differences.Furthermore, the daily oxygen consumption rate was calculated in mg oxygen per 100 g product per day of storage (mg O2/100 g/d) based on the oxygen uptake data, which allows the estimation of the average oxidation rate (Figure 3). The diagram shows that the variants with potassium sorbate and benzyl alcohol absorbed the highest mean amount of daily oxygen consumption per day, while phenethyl alcohol, ethanol, and glyceryl stearate were the lowest. For ethanol, the value was also in the negative range, as in Figure 2, indicating that the oxidative processes were too weak to consume the oxygen entering the headspace. Since these data were calculated based on the data in Figure 2, the same argumentation can also be applied here, and the data can be interpreted as a measure of oxidation. The advantage of this representation is the estimation of the kinetics (oxidation rate per day) and the simplified summarized representation of a large volume of data.To test statistical significance, again a one-way factorial ANOVA and a one-sided two-sample t-test for different variances were used. The ANOVA provided no evidence of significant mean differences. The t-test showed that the daily oxygen consumption rate from the sample with potassium sorbate was significantly higher than with ethanol and glyceryl caprylate (Table 4). The other variants showed no significant differences.The comparison of both methods showed that the oxygen uptake delivered better the progression of oxidation with many data points, while the daily oxygen consumption rate better summarized the oxidation kinetics. Although the mean values of the daily oxygen consumption rate were comparable to the measurements of the oxygen uptake after 96 days, the standard deviation was clearly higher and made it difficult to prove significance. The reason for this could be that the calculation of the daily oxygen consumption rate also includes the values from the beginning of the measurement, where all samples did not show any differences in oxidation. The advantage of the daily oxygen consumption rate is that all data points are included in the calculation, and possible inaccuracies are less considered. The statistical evaluation of the oxygen uptake occurred only at the end of the storage, when the samples already had enough time to show significant oxidation. This improved standard deviation and significance testing but only considered a smaller number of data.It can be shown from the data that potassium sorbate and benzyl alcohol had a pro-oxidant effect and accelerated the oxidation of the O/W emulsion strongly in this test, while phenethyl alcohol showed a moderate acceleration. Ethanol and glyceryl caprylate showed no oxidation accelerating effect in this test. These data are therefore consistent with the sources discussed earlier in the introduction. In order to describe whether ingredients significantly influence oxidation, as in this case, an experimental setup of at least 96 days at 30 °C with light exposure was suitable. Both parameters, oxygen uptake, and daily oxygen consumption rate can be used to determine oxidation. However, due to the lack of a blank sample, it was not possible to quantify how much the preservatives enhanced oxidation compared to a sample where preservatives were absent.The oxidation showed a meaningful level for use in practice. Using the example of the sample with potassium sorbate, a total of 20.01 mg O2 (0.32 mol) was absorbed per 100 g over the storage time. This is a high value compared with soybean oil, which contains also a high amount of linoleic acid and is no longer perceived as acceptable from 3–4 mg of absorbed oxygen per 100 g [67]. This low threshold may be caused by the high concentration of unsaturated fatty acids in plant-based oils, which oxidize and produce off-flavors faster. The emulsion in this study contained 22.80 g of canola oil per 100 g, of which 6.84 g was linoleic acid. This fatty acid can be converted to hexanal as the main oxidation product and has a perception threshold of 320 µg/kg oil (orthonasal) [68]. Data show after absorption of 57.05 mg O2 per gram of linoleic acid (0.5 mol O2/mol oil), a total of 7.65 mg of volatile products were found, of which 5.10 mg was hexanal [68]. Transferred to the data of this study, 100 g of the emulsion would only need to react with 0.36 mg of O2 to reach the hexanal perception limit. Other studies described a rancid odor threshold for hexanal concentrations above 5 to 10 ppm in low-fat foods [69]. To reach this limit, 100 g emulsion should have absorbed just 5.59 to 11.19 mg oxygen. Assuming that 1 mol O2 could lead to oxidation of 1 mol of oxygen-sensitive substances, a change in the shelf life, efficacy, and acceptance of the product is possible at the high intake of 0.32 mol O2 per 100 g. While to the best of the authors’ knowledge, there is currently no study in the literature describing the distribution of oxygen leading to oxidation and its shelf-life-limiting effects in O/W emulsions, it is likely that this low threshold could be reached and result in compromised quality.To maintain the quality of cosmetic products, it is important to tolerate as minimal oxidation as possible. Therefore, pro-oxidant substances should be avoided, reduced, or compensated, even if preservatives are the cause of accelerated oxidation. It is recommended to investigate other preservatives and multifunctionals for their influence on oxidation in the future to discover possible alternatives or identify more unknown pro-oxidant effects. It is likely that preservatives or multifunctionals with similar molecular structures such as benzoic acid, anisic acid, phenoxyethanol, phenylpropanol, salicylic acid, or thymol may also have an effect on oxidation. Additionally, the question is whether molecules without unsaturated carbon bonds, such as levulinic acid, methylpropanediol, ethylhexylglycerol, or pentylene glycol, can influence oxidation. Optimization of the use concentration should also be considered, either by reduction, synergistic combination, or individual adaptation to the microbial risk of each application. Antioxidants can be used to compensate for the effect, for example, natural polyphenols, but their concentration should be optimized in further research, and possible synergistic and antagonistic effects with the preservatives should be investigated. In addition, synergistic or antagonistic effects with other cosmetic ingredients should also be studied to avoid negative effects such as the formation of benzene that was described for benzyl alcohol and ascorbic acid (vitamin C) [70]. Some ingredients such as tocopherols (vitamin E) can themselves lead to undesirable pro-oxidant effects if used in inappropriate concentrations [18,71]. Additionally, polyphenolic antioxidants are found to be pro-oxidants in high dosages [72]. Therefore, it is necessary to adjust the dosage of antioxidants individually to the ingredients contained. For future research, in addition to oxygen uptake, a quantification of volatile components is recommended and an organoleptic evaluation should occur to quantify the actual off-flavors in the emulsion matrix to correlate human perception with oxidation. It is of high interest to determine at which oxygen uptake value a significant change in the quality and efficacy or consumer perception of the product occurs and by what methods this period can be extended. Further data are necessary to verify how the preservative-caused oxidation can influence the shelf life of the products. Analysis of droplet size, rheological analysis, and analysis of oxidation products would also ideally enhance further research. Furthermore, it should be investigated whether the oxidation can also be transferred to W/O-emulsions or O/W emulsions with other ingredients. 4. ConclusionsThe switch to natural and consumer-accepted preservatives requires rapid research and development of new active ingredients, but long-term shelf-life-limiting effects such as oxidation must also be taken into account. This could lead to reduced preservation of the oxidation-sensitive active ingredients and, thus, have a negative impact on the quality and efficacy of the product. In this study, potassium sorbate and benzyl alcohol showed significant pro-oxidant effects in the O/W emulsion tested. Both oxygen uptake and daily oxygen consumption rate were suitable for oxidation estimation. However, oxidation processes are highly dependent on the matrix and should be optimized individually for each product. These results indicate that other substances currently used as preservatives and multifunctionals could also have a negative effect on shelf life. Further research should be conducted to characterize these effects in more detail and to find methods to avoid or reduce them.


Author ContributionsConceptualization, A.S.; methodology, H.Z.; data curation, A.S. and H.Z.; writing—original draft preparation, A.S.; writing—review and editing, A.S. and H.Z. Both authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.FundingThis research received no external funding.Institutional Review Board StatementNot applicable.Informed Consent StatementNot applicable.Data Availability StatementNot applicable.AcknowledgmentsThanks are due to Christine Berger and Christopher Schmidt for the experimental support of this study. We would also like to thank Katrin Bach at the Management Center Innsbruck (MCI) for the constructive and helpful suggestions as well as the professional and competent supervision of this master thesis. We also appreciate Frank Welle’s proofreading and support.Conflicts of InterestThe authors declare no conflict of interest.ReferencesMatwiejczuk:, N.; Galicka, A.; Brzóska, M.M. Review of the safety of application of cosmetic products containing parabens. J. Appl. Toxicol. 2020, 40, 176–210. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Matić, M.; Puh, B. Consumers’ Purchase Intentions Towards Natural Cosmetics. Ekon. Vjesn. Econviews-Rev. Contemp. Bus. Entrep. Econ. Issues 2016, 29, 53. [Google Scholar]Kale, S.N.; Deore, S.L. Emulsion micro emulsion and nano emulsion: A review. Syst. Rev. Pharm. 2017, 8, S39. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef][Green Version]Köhler, K.; Schuchmann, I.H.P. Emulgiertechnik: Grundlagen, Verfahren und Anwendungen; Behr‘s Verlag: Hamburg, Germany, 2012. [Google Scholar]Bährle-Rapp, M. Springer Lexikon Kosmetik und Körperpflege, 5th ed.; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2020. [Google Scholar]Lagaly, G.; Schulz, O.; Zimehl, R. Dispersionen und Emulsionen: Eine Einführung in die Kolloidik feinverteilter Stoffe einschließlich der Tonminerale; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2013. [Google Scholar]Nour, A.H. Emulsion types, stability mechanisms and rheology: A review. Int. J. Innov. Res. Sci. Stud. (IJIRSS) 2018, 1, 14–21. [Google Scholar]Halla, N.; Fernandes, I.P.; Heleno, S.A.; Costa, P.; Boucherit-Otmani, Z.; Boucherit, K.; Rodrigues, A.E.; Ferreira, I.C.F.R.; Barreiro, M.F. Cosmetics preservation: A review on present strategies. Molecules 2018, 23, 1571. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef][Green Version]Lück, E. Chemische Lebensmittelkonservierung: Stoffe Wirkungen Methoden; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 1977. [Google Scholar]Rähse, W. Cosmetic Creams: Development, Manufacture and Marketing of Effective Skin Care Products; Wiley-VCH: Weinheim, Germany, 2020. [Google Scholar]Das Europäische Parlament und der Rat der Europäischen Union. Verordnung (EG) Nr. 1223/2009 des Europäischen Perlaments und des Rates vom 30. November 2009 Über Kosmetische Mittel: VO (EG) Nr.1223/2009; Das Europäische Parlament und der Rat der Europäischen Union: Bruxelles, Belgium, 2009. [Google Scholar]Evonik Dr. Straetmans GmbH. Product Data Sheet Phenethylalcohol Nat; Evonik Dr. Straetmans GmbH: Hamburg, Germany, 2017. [Google Scholar]TRI-K, Inc. Product Data Sheet Potassium Sorbate FCC; TRI-K, Inc.: Channahon, IL, USA, 2008. [Google Scholar]Kampf, G.; Rudolf, M.; Labadie, J.-C.; Barrett, S.P. Spectrum of antimicrobial activity and user acceptability of the hand disinfectant agent Sterillium Gel. J. Hosp. Infect. 2002, 52, 141–177. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Merck KGaA. Products Data Sheet RonaCare; Merck KGaA: Darmstadt, Germany, 2020. [Google Scholar]Evonik Dr. Straetmans GmbH. Product Data Sheet Dermosoft® GMCY MB; Evonik Dr. Straetmans GmbH: Hamburg, Germany, 2020. [Google Scholar]Gunstone, F.D.; Norris, F.A. Lipids in Food Chemistry, Biochemistry and Technology; Pergamon Press: Oxford, UK, 1982. [Google Scholar]Werman, M.J.; Neeman, I. Oxidative stability of avocado oil. J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc. 1986, 63, 355–360. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]McClements, D.J.; Decker, E.A. Lipid oxidation in oil-in-water emulsions: Impact of molecular environment on chemical reactions in heterogeneous food systems. J. Food Sci. 2000, 65, 1270–1282. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Matissek, R.; Baltes, W. Lebensmittelchemie, 8th ed.; Springer Spektrum: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2016. [Google Scholar]Eghbaliferiz, S.; Iranshahi, M. Pro-oxidant activity of polyphenols, flavonoids, anthocyanins and carotenoids: Updated review of mechanisms and catalyzing metals. Phytother. Res. 2016, 30, 1379–1391. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]Oroian, M.; Escriche, I. Antioxidants: Characterization, natural sources, extraction and analysis. Food Res. Int. 2015, 74, 10–36. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Springer, A.; Destler, E.; Pazurik, B.; Platzer, M.; Kiese, S. Sustainable & Long-lasting: Natural Cosmetics Made from Purely Plant-based Ingredients. Sofwjournal 2022, 148, 32–34. [Google Scholar]Decker, E.A.; McClements, D.J.; Bourlieu-Lacanal, C.; Durand, E.; Figueroa-Espinoza, M.C.; Lecomte, J.; Villeneuve, P. Hurdles in Predicting Antioxidant Efficacy in Oil-in-water emulsions. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 2017, 67, 183–194. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef][Green Version]Wu, D.C.; Goldman, M.P.A. Topical Anti-inflammatory Healing Regimen Utilizing Conjugated Linolenic Acid for Use Post-ablative Laser Resurfacing of the Face: A Randomized, Controlled Trial. J. Clin. Aesthetic Dermatol. 2017, 10, 12–17. [Google Scholar]Ferreira, M.J.; Fiadeiro, T.; Silvia, M.; Soares, A.P. Topical γ-linolenic acid therapy in atopic dermatitis. Allergo J. 1998, 7, 213–216. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Nasrollahi, S.A.; Ayatollahi, A.; Yazdanparast, T.; Samadi, A.; Hosseini, H.; Shamsipour, M.; Akhlaghi, A.A.; Yadangi, S.; Abels, C.; Firooz, A.; et al. Comparison of linoleic acid-containing water-in-oil emulsion with urea-containing water-in-oil emulsion in the treatment of atopic dermatitis: A randomized clinical trial. Clin. Cosmet. Investig. Dermatol. 2018, 11, 21–28. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed][Green Version]Girotti, A.W.; Kriska, T. Role of lipid hydroperoxides in photo-oxidative stress signaling. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 2004, 6, 301–310. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]Kohen, R. Skin antioxidants: Their role in aging and in oxidative stress—New approaches for their evaluation. Biomed. Pharmacother. 1999, 53, 181–192. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Briganti, S.; Picardo, M. Antioxidant activity, lipid peroxidation and skin diseases. What’s new. J. Eur. Acad. Dermatol. Venereol. 2003, 17, 663–669. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Chiba, K.; Kawakami, K.; Sone, T.; Onoue, M. Characteristics of skin wrinkling and dermal changes induced by repeated application of squalene monohydroperoxide to hairless mouse skin. Ski. Pharmacol. Physiol. 2003, 16, 242–251. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Ohkido, M.; Yoshino, K.; Matsuo, I. Lipid peroxide of human skin. In Biochem. Norm. Abnorm. Epidermal Differ. 1981, 10, 269–278. [Google Scholar]Dey, S.; Nagababu, B.H. Applications of Food Colour and Bio-Preservatives in the Food and Its Effect on the Human Health. Food Chem. Adv. 2022, 100019. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Gallarate, M.; Carlotti, M.E.; Trotta, M.; Bovo, S. On the stability of ascorbic acid in emulsified systems for topical and cosmetic use. Int. J. Pharm. 1999, 188, 233–241. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Arnhold, T. Struktur Natürlicher und Synthetischer Retinoide In Untersuchungen zum Metabolismus von Vitamin A Retinoiden im Hinblick auf eine Risikoabschätzung Ihrer Teratogenen Wirkung Beim Menschen. Ph.D. Thesis, Der Tehnichen Universitat Carolo-Wilhelmina, Braunschweig, Germany, 2000. [Google Scholar]James, A.M.; Smith, R.A.; Murphy, M.P. Antioxidant and pro-oxidant properties of mitochondrial Coenzyme, Q. Arch. Biochem. Biophys 2004, 423, 47–56. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]Jirovetz, L.; Buchbauer, G.; Schmidt, E.; Denkova, Z.; Slavchev, A.; Stoyanova, A.; Geissler, M. Purity, antimicrobial activities and olfactory evaluations of 2-phenylethanol and some derivatives. J. Essent. Oil Res. 2008, 20, 82–85. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Lucchini, J.J.; Bonnaveiro, N.; Cremieux, A.; Le Goffic, F. Mechanism of bactericidal action of phenethyl alcohol in Escherichia coli. Curr. Microbiol. 1993, 27, 295–300. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Zhu, Y.J.; Zhou, H.T.; Hu, Y.H.; Tang, J.Y.; Su, M.X.; Guo, Y.J.; Liu, B. Antityrosinase and antimicrobial activities of 2-phenylethanol, 2-phenylacetaldehyde and 2-phenylacetic acid. Food Chem. 2011, 124, 298–302. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Molinari, F.; Gandolfi, R.; Aragozzini, F.; Leon, R.; Prazeres, D.M. Biotransformations in two-liquid-phase systems: Production of phenylacetaldehyde by oxidation of 2-phenylethanol with acetic acid bacteria. Enzym. Microb. Technol. 1999, 25, 729–735. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Sofos, J.N. Sorbate Food Preservatives; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 1989. [Google Scholar]Lück, E. Food applications of sorbic acid and its salts. Food Addit. Contam. 1990, 7, 711–715. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Stopforth, J.D.; Sofos, J.N.; Busta, F.F. Sorbic acid and sorbates. Food Sci. Technol. 2005, 145, 49. [Google Scholar]Elez-Martínez, P.; Soliva-Fortuny, R.; Martín-Belloso, O. Oxidative rancidity in avocado purée as affected by α-tocopherol, sorbic acid and storage atmosphere. Eur. Food Res. Technol. 2007, 226, 295. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Gerschenson, L.N.; Campos, C.A. Sorbic acid stability during processing and storage of high moisture foods. In Food Preservation by Moisture Control; Cánovas, B., Chanes, W., Eds.; Technomic Publishing Co: Lancaster, UK, 1995. [Google Scholar]Windholz, M. The Merck Index: An Encyclopedia of Chemicals and Drugs, 9th ed.; Merck: Rahway, NJ, USA, 1976. [Google Scholar]Cillard, J.; Cillard, P.; Cormier, M. Effect of experimental factors on the pro-oxidant behavior of α-tocopherol. J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc. 1980, 57, 255–261. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Jacob, S.E.; Barron, G.S. Benzyl alcohol: A covert fragrance. Dermatitis 2007, 18, 232–233. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Gottschalck, T.E.; Bailey, J.E. International Cosmetic Ingredient Dictionary and Handbook, 13th ed.; Personal Care Products Council: Washington, DC, USA, 2010. [Google Scholar]Mashayekhi, H.A.; Rezaee, M.; Garmaroudi, S.S.; Montazeri, N.; Ahmadi, S.J. Rapid and sensitive determination of benzaldehyde arising from benzyl alcohol used as preservative in an injectable formulation solution using dispersive liquid–liquid microextraction followed by gas chromatography. Anal. Sci. 2011, 27, 865–868. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed][Green Version]Johnson, W.; Bergfeld, W.F.; Belsito, D.V.; Hill, R.A.; Klaassen, C.D.; Liebler, D.C.; Marks, J.G.; Shank, R.C.; Slaga, T.J.; Snyder, P.W.; et al. Safety Assessment of Benzyl Alcohol, Benzoic Acid and its Salts, and Benzyl Benzoate. Int. J. Toxicol. 2017, 36, 5–30. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Warth, A.D. Mechanism of action of benzoic acid on Zygosaccharomyces bailii: Effects on glycolytic metabolite levels, energy production, and intracellular pH. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1991, 57, 3410–3414. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed][Green Version]Medeiros Vinci, R.; De Meulenaer, B.; Andjelkovic, M.; Canfyn, M.; Van Overmeire, I.; Van Loco, J. Factors influencing benzene formation from the decarboxylation of benzoate in liquid model systems. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2011, 59, 12975–12981. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Frank, S.; Dunkel, A.; Schieberle, P. Model studies on benzene formation from benzaldehyde. Eur. Food Res. Technol. 2020, 246, 901–908. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Sadighara, P.; Pirhadi, M.; Sadighara, M.; Shavaly-Gilani, P.; Zirak, M.R.; Zeinali, T. Benzene food exposure and their prevent methods: A review. Nutr. Food Sci. 2022, 28. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Hung, L.C.; Ismail, R.; Basri, M.; Nang, H.L.L.; Tejo, B.A.; Abu Hassan, H.; May, C.Y. Testing of glyceryl monoesters for their anti-microbial susceptibility and their influence in emulsions. J. Oil Palm Res. 2010, 22, 846–855. [Google Scholar]Manning, M.; Orawski, P. Food grade esters used as personal care antimicrobials. Cosmet. Toil. 2005, 120, 63–68. [Google Scholar]Ahn, G.W.; Choi, M.H.; Woo, Y.T.; Jo, B.K. A Study on the Antimicrobial Effect of Glyceryl Caprylate in Cosmetics. J. Soc. Cosmet. Sci. Korea 2007, 33, 47–52. [Google Scholar]Lawan, K.; Kanlayavattanakul, M. Antimicrobial efficacy of caprylyl glycol and ethylhexylglycerine in emulsion. J. Health Res. 2009, 23, 1–3. [Google Scholar]Martínez, M.L.; Penci, M.; Ixtaina, V.; Ribbota, P.D.; Maesti, D. Effect of natural and synthetic antioxidants on the oxidative stability of walnut oil under different storage conditions. LWT-Food Sci. Technol. 2013, 51, 44–50. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Bachofen, R. Gas metabolism of microorganisms. Experientia 1991, 47, 508–513. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Pascual, O.; Vignault, A.; Gombau, J.; Navarro, M.; Gómez-Alonso, S.; García-Romero, E.; Canals, J.M.; Hermosín-Gutíerrez, I.; Teissedre, P.-L.; Zamora, F. Oxygen consumption rates by different oenological tannins in a model wine solution. Food Chem. 2017, 234, 26–32. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Navarro, M.; Vignault, A.; Gombau, J.; Navarro, M.; Gómez-Alonso, S.; García-Romero, E.; Canalset, J.M.; Hermosín-Gutíerrez, I.; Teissedre, P.-L.; Zamora, F. Oxygen consumption by oak chips in a model wine solution—Influence of the botanical origin, toast level and ellagitannin content. Food Chem. 2016, 199, 822–827. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]Böhner, N. Einfluss der Handelsbeleuchtung auf die Qualität lichtempfindlicher Lebensmittel am Beispiel von Brühwurst und Kaffeesahne. Ph.D. Thesis, Technische Universität München, München, Germany, 2019. [Google Scholar]Malviya, A.; Jadran, V. Henry’s law constant of nitrogen, oxygen, and argon in ternary aqueous alcoholic solvent mixtures. J. Chem. Eng. Data 2019, 65, 1189–1196. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Tokunaga, J. Solubilities of oxygen, nitrogen, and carbon dioxide in aqueous alcohol solutions. J. Chem. Eng. Data 1975, 20, 41–46. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Ahlhaus, O.E. Verpackung mit Kunststoffen, 1st ed.; Hanser Verlag: München, Germany, 1997. [Google Scholar]Belitz, H.-D.; Grosch, W.; Schieberle, P. Lehrbuch der Lebensmittelchemie, 6th ed.; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2008; p. 208. [Google Scholar]Fritsch, C.W.; Gale, J.A. Hexanal as a measure of rancidity in low fat foods. J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc. 1977, 54, 225–228. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Bocharova, O.; Sentyabrina, R.; Vasiliy, E. Toluene and benzyl alcohol formation in fruit juices containing benzoates. J. Food Processing Preserv. 2017, 41, 13054. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Fennema, O.R. Food Chemistry; CRC Press: Boca Raton, FL, USA, 1996; Volume 76. [Google Scholar]Ofosu, F.K.; Daliri, E.B.M.; Elahi, F.; Chelliah, R.; Lee, B.H.; Oh, D.H. New insights on the use of polyphenols as natural preservatives and their emerging safety concerns. Front. Sustain. Food Syst. 2020, 4, 525810. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]







Figure 1.
Scheme for experimental setup for measuring the oxygen uptake of emulsions during an accelerated storage test.




 Figure 1.
Scheme for experimental setup for measuring the oxygen uptake of emulsions during an accelerated storage test.









Figure 2.
Development of oxygen uptake (mean ± standard deviation) (mg O2/100 g) with different preservatives, calculated from the oxygen concentration in the headspace measured over a storage time of 96 days at 30 °C under light exposure.




 Figure 2.
Development of oxygen uptake (mean ± standard deviation) (mg O2/100 g) with different preservatives, calculated from the oxygen concentration in the headspace measured over a storage time of 96 days at 30 °C under light exposure.









Figure 3.
Daily oxygen consumption rate (mean ± standard deviation) (mg O2/100 g/d) with different preservatives, calculated from the oxygen uptake measured over a storage time of 96 days at 30 °C under light exposure.




 Figure 3.
Daily oxygen consumption rate (mean ± standard deviation) (mg O2/100 g/d) with different preservatives, calculated from the oxygen uptake measured over a storage time of 96 days at 30 °C under light exposure.









Table 1.
Overview of selected preservatives.



Table 1.
Overview of selected preservatives.

PreservativepH-RangeWater Solubility (g/L)Preservation SpectrumMax. Quantity [11] (%)Phenethyl alcohol [12]unlimited20gram −, mold0.7–1.0Potassium sorbate [13]<6582yeast, mold0.6Ethanol [14]allunlimitedbroad spectrum20.0Benzyl alcohol [15]<4.540broad spectrum0.5Glyceryl caprylate [16]4.0–7.0not specifiedgram +, yeast0.3–1.0









Table 2.
Overview of the formulations used.



Table 2.
Overview of the formulations used.

PreservativeWater (%)Canola Oil (%)Glyceryl Stearate SE (%)Xanthan Gum (%)pH-Regulator (%)Preservative (%)Phenethyl alcohol69.322.87.00.20.20.7Potassium sorbate69.822.87.00.20.20.2Ethanol55.022.87.00.20.215.0Benzyl alcohol69.522.87.00.20.20.5Glyceryl caprylate69.722.87.00.20.20.3









Table 3.
Significance of oxygen uptake (mg O2/100 g) depending on used preservative after 96 days at 30 °C under light exposure between two samples using one-tailed two-sample t-test for different variances (α < 0.05 = *, not significant = n.s.).



Table 3.
Significance of oxygen uptake (mg O2/100 g) depending on used preservative after 96 days at 30 °C under light exposure between two samples using one-tailed two-sample t-test for different variances (α < 0.05 = *, not significant = n.s.).

 Potassium SorbateEthanolBenzyl AlcoholGlyceryl CaprylatePhenethyl alcoholn.s.n.s.n.s.n.s.Potassium sorbate *n.s.*Ethanol  *n.s.Benzyl alcohol   *









Table 4.
Significance of daily oxygen consumption rate (mg O2/100 g/d) depending on used preservative after 96 days at 30 °C under light exposure between two samples using one-tailed two-sample t-test for different variances (α < 0.05 = *, not significant = n.s.).



Table 4.
Significance of daily oxygen consumption rate (mg O2/100 g/d) depending on used preservative after 96 days at 30 °C under light exposure between two samples using one-tailed two-sample t-test for different variances (α < 0.05 = *, not significant = n.s.).

 Potassium SorbateEthanolBenzyl AlcoholGlyceryl CaprylatePhenethyl alcoholn.s.n.s.n.s.n.s.Potassium sorbate *n.s.*Ethanol  n.s.n.s.Benzyl alcohol   n.s.

Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
© 2022 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).



Share and Cite
























MDPI and ACS Style

Springer, A.; Ziegler, H. The Role of Preservatives and Multifunctionals on the Oxidation of Cosmetic O/W Emulsions. Cosmetics 2022, 9, 59.
https://doi.org/10.3390/cosmetics9030059


AMA Style

Springer A, Ziegler H. The Role of Preservatives and Multifunctionals on the Oxidation of Cosmetic O/W Emulsions. Cosmetics. 2022; 9(3):59.
https://doi.org/10.3390/cosmetics9030059

Chicago/Turabian Style

Springer, Arielle, and Helena Ziegler. 2022. "The Role of Preservatives and Multifunctionals on the Oxidation of Cosmetic O/W Emulsions" Cosmetics 9, no. 3: 59.
https://doi.org/10.3390/cosmetics9030059


Find Other Styles








Note that from the first issue of 2016, this journal uses article numbers instead of page numbers. See further details here.

Article Metrics


No

No




Article Access Statistics

For more information on the journal statistics, click here.

Multiple requests from the same IP address are counted as one view.










Zoom
|
 Orient 
|
 As Lines 
|
 As Sticks 
|
 As Cartoon 
|
 As Surface 
|
Previous Scene
|
Next Scene










Cite


















Export citation file:
BibTeX |
EndNote |
RIS




MDPI and ACS Style

Springer, A.; Ziegler, H. The Role of Preservatives and Multifunctionals on the Oxidation of Cosmetic O/W Emulsions. Cosmetics 2022, 9, 59.
https://doi.org/10.3390/cosmetics9030059


AMA Style

Springer A, Ziegler H. The Role of Preservatives and Multifunctionals on the Oxidation of Cosmetic O/W Emulsions. Cosmetics. 2022; 9(3):59.
https://doi.org/10.3390/cosmetics9030059

Chicago/Turabian Style

Springer, Arielle, and Helena Ziegler. 2022. "The Role of Preservatives and Multifunctionals on the Oxidation of Cosmetic O/W Emulsions" Cosmetics 9, no. 3: 59.
https://doi.org/10.3390/cosmetics9030059


Find Other Styles








Note that from the first issue of 2016, this journal uses article numbers instead of page numbers. See further details here.




clear










Cosmetics,
EISSN 2079-9284,
Published by MDPI



RSS


Content Alert






Further Information


Article Processing Charges


Pay an Invoice


Open Access Policy


Contact MDPI


Jobs at MDPI




Guidelines


For Authors


For Reviewers


For Editors


For Librarians


For Publishers


For Societies


For Conference Organizers




MDPI Initiatives


Sciforum


MDPI Books


Preprints.org


Scilit


SciProfiles


Encyclopedia


JAMS


Proceedings Series




Follow MDPI


LinkedIn


Facebook


Twitter







Subscribe to receive issue release notifications and newsletters from MDPI journals


Acoustics
Actuators
Administrative Sciences
Adolescents
Advances in Respiratory Medicine
Aerospace
Agriculture
AgriEngineering
Agrochemicals
Agronomy
AI
Air
Algorithms
Allergies
Alloys
Analytica
Analytics
Anatomia
Anesthesia Research
Animals
Antibiotics
Antibodies
Antioxidants
Applied Biosciences
Applied Mechanics
Applied Microbiology
Applied Nano
Applied Sciences
Applied System Innovation
AppliedChem
AppliedMath
Aquaculture Journal
Architecture
Arthropoda
Arts
Astronomy
Atmosphere
Atoms
Audiology Research
Automation
Axioms
Bacteria
Batteries
Behavioral Sciences
Beverages
Big Data and Cognitive Computing
BioChem
Bioengineering
Biologics
Biology
Biology and Life Sciences Forum
Biomass
Biomechanics
BioMed
Biomedicines
BioMedInformatics
Biomimetics
Biomolecules
Biophysica
Biosensors
BioTech
Birds
Blockchains
Brain Sciences
Buildings
Businesses
C
Cancers
Cardiogenetics
Catalysts
Cells
Ceramics
Challenges
ChemEngineering
Chemistry
Chemistry Proceedings
Chemosensors
Children
Chips
CivilEng
Clean Technologies
Climate
Clinical and Translational Neuroscience
Clinics and Practice
Clocks & Sleep
Coasts
Coatings
Colloids and Interfaces
Colorants
Commodities
Complications
Compounds
Computation
Computer Sciences & Mathematics Forum
Computers
Condensed Matter
Conservation
Construction Materials
Corrosion and Materials Degradation
Cosmetics
COVID
Crops
Cryptography
Crystals
Current Issues in Molecular Biology
Current Oncology
Dairy
Data
Dentistry Journal
Dermato
Dermatopathology
Designs
Diabetology
Diagnostics
Dietetics
Digital
Disabilities
Diseases
Diversity
DNA
Drones
Drugs and Drug Candidates
Dynamics
Earth
Ecologies
Econometrics
Economies
Education Sciences
Electricity
Electrochem
Electronic Materials
Electronics
Encyclopedia
Endocrines
Energies
Eng
Engineering Proceedings
Entropy
Environmental Sciences Proceedings
Environments
Epidemiologia
Epigenomes
European Burn Journal
European Journal of Investigation in Health, Psychology and Education
Fermentation
Fibers
FinTech
Fire
Fishes
Fluids
Foods
Forecasting
Forensic Sciences
Forests
Fossils
Foundations
Fractal and Fractional
Fuels
Future
Future Internet
Future Pharmacology
Future Transportation
Galaxies
Games
Gases
Gastroenterology Insights
Gastrointestinal Disorders
Gastronomy
Gels
Genealogy
Genes
Geographies
GeoHazards
Geomatics
Geosciences
Geotechnics
Geriatrics
Gout, Urate, and Crystal Deposition Disease
Grasses
Hardware
Healthcare
Hearts
Hemato
Hematology Reports
Heritage
Histories
Horticulturae
Hospitals
Humanities
Humans
Hydrobiology
Hydrogen
Hydrology
Hygiene
Immuno
Infectious Disease Reports
Informatics
Information
Infrastructures
Inorganics
Insects
Instruments
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health
International Journal of Financial Studies
International Journal of Molecular Sciences
International Journal of Neonatal Screening
International Journal of Plant Biology
International Journal of Translational Medicine
International Journal of Turbomachinery, Propulsion and Power
International Medical Education
Inventions
IoT
ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information
J
Journal of Ageing and Longevity
Journal of Cardiovascular Development and Disease
Journal of Clinical & Translational Ophthalmology
Journal of Clinical Medicine
Journal of Composites Science
Journal of Cybersecurity and Privacy
Journal of Developmental Biology
Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Analyses
Journal of Functional Biomaterials
Journal of Functional Morphology and Kinesiology
Journal of Fungi
Journal of Imaging
Journal of Intelligence
Journal of Low Power Electronics and Applications
Journal of Manufacturing and Materials Processing
Journal of Marine Science and Engineering
Journal of Molecular Pathology
Journal of Nanotheranostics
Journal of Nuclear Engineering
Journal of Otorhinolaryngology, Hearing and Balance Medicine
Journal of Personalized Medicine
Journal of Respiration
Journal of Risk and Financial Management
Journal of Sensor and Actuator Networks
Journal of Theoretical and Applied Electronic Commerce Research
Journal of Vascular Diseases
Journal of Xenobiotics
Journal of Zoological and Botanical Gardens
Journalism and Media
Kidney and Dialysis
Kinases and Phosphatases
Knowledge
Land
Languages
Laws
Life
Liquids
Literature
Livers
Logics
Logistics
Lubricants
Lymphatics
Machine Learning and Knowledge Extraction
Machines
Macromol
Magnetism
Magnetochemistry
Marine Drugs
Materials
Materials Proceedings
Mathematical and Computational Applications
Mathematics
Medical Sciences
Medical Sciences Forum
Medicina
Medicines
Membranes
Merits
Metabolites
Metals
Meteorology
Methane
Methods and Protocols
Metrology
Micro
Microbiology Research
Micromachines
Microorganisms
Microplastics
Minerals
Mining
Modelling
Molbank
Molecules
Multimodal Technologies and Interaction
Muscles
Nanoenergy Advances
Nanomanufacturing
Nanomaterials
NDT
Network
Neuroglia
Neurology International
NeuroSci
Nitrogen
Non-Coding RNA
Nursing Reports
Nutraceuticals
Nutrients
Obesities
Oceans
Onco
Optics
Oral
Organics
Organoids
Osteology
Oxygen
Parasitologia
Particles
Pathogens
Pathophysiology
Pediatric Reports
Pharmaceuticals
Pharmaceutics
Pharmacoepidemiology
Pharmacy
Philosophies
Photochem
Photonics
Phycology
Physchem
Physical Sciences Forum
Physics
Physiologia
Plants
Plasma
Platforms
Pollutants
Polymers
Polysaccharides
Poultry
Powders
Proceedings
Processes
Prosthesis
Proteomes
Psych
Psychiatry International
Psychoactives
Publications
Quantum Beam Science
Quantum Reports
Quaternary
Radiation
Reactions
Receptors
Recycling
Religions
Remote Sensing
Reports
Reproductive Medicine
Resources
Rheumato
Risks
Robotics
Ruminants
Safety
Sci
Scientia Pharmaceutica
Sclerosis
Seeds
Sensors
Separations
Sexes
Signals
Sinusitis
Smart Cities
Social Sciences
Societies
Software
Soil Systems
Solar
Solids
Spectroscopy Journal
Sports
Standards
Stats
Stresses
Surfaces
Surgeries
Surgical Techniques Development
Sustainability
Sustainable Chemistry
Symmetry
SynBio
Systems
Targets
Taxonomy
Technologies
Telecom
Textiles
Thalassemia Reports
Thermo
Tomography
Tourism and Hospitality
Toxics
Toxins
Transplantology
Trauma Care
Trends in Higher Education
Tropical Medicine and Infectious Disease
Universe
Urban Science
Uro
Vaccines
Vehicles
Venereology
Veterinary Sciences
Vibration
Virtual Worlds
Viruses
Vision
Waste
Water
Wind
Women
World
World Electric Vehicle Journal
Youth
Zoonotic Diseases


Subscribe







© 1996-2023 MDPI (Basel, Switzerland) unless otherwise stated



Disclaimer


Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely
those of the individual author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or
the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to people or property resulting from any ideas,
methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.


Terms and Conditions


Privacy Policy







We use cookies on our website to ensure you get the best experience.
Read more about our cookies here.


Accept




We have just recently launched a new version of our website.

Help us to further improve by taking part in this short 5 minute survey 
here.
here.




Never show this again






Share Link

































Copy



clear





Share





https://www.mdpi.com/1666904



























































































































































































































































































































































clear


Back to TopTop






































