Document Name: role of Water, preservatives, fragrance in Cold Cream2
Document link: https://nationaleczema.org/eczema/treatment/moisturizing/








Lotion and moisturizer for eczema - everything you need to know














































































 


 














Moisturizer and Lotion for Eczema: Everything You Need to Know




Keeping your skin’s moisture intact is one of the most important things you can do to help control your eczema or atopic dermatitis.
Moisturizers and lotions help protect the outermost layer of skin known as the stratum corneum or skin barrier. People living with eczema have damaged a skin barrier, which makes their skin more sensitive to irritants, allergens, bacteria and other invaders. A damaged skin barrier also makes it harder for the skin to retain water, leading to chronic dry, itchy skin, which can cause eczema and other skin conditions to flare-up or get worse.



Wind, low humidity, cold temperatures, harsh soaps and prolonged exposure to water, all lead to dry skin, especially for some skin types. So, it’s important to understand how and when to properly moisturize and which products are best to use when you have eczema.
Some things to remember when moisturizing or using lotion:

If you use a prescription topical medication, apply it as directed, before you moisturize.
Apply a thick layer of moisturizer all over your skin within three minutes of bathing or showering to “lock in” moisture and protect the skin barrier.
Moisturizers that are fragrance and dye-free are the safest and least irritating.
Prevent contamination by using a clean implement rather than your hands to remove moisturizer from the container.
Soften moisturizer by rubbing it between your hands and then apply it to your body using the palm, in downward strokes. Avoid rubbing in the moisturizer by stroking up and down, or in circles.
If the moisturizer feels “tacky” on your skin, don’t remove the excess. It will be absorbed within a few minutes.
Moisturize hands every time you wash them or when they come into contact with water.

What kinds of lotions are most effective for my eczema?
When shopping for your next lotion, beware: some have ingredients that can do more harm than good. Because lotions are primarily made of water, they evaporate quickly and may contain preservatives that burn when applied to skin that’s scratched or broken. To prevent using a lotion with preservatives, use lotions which contain the right oils and choose fragrance-free hand creams and body lotions.
This is especially true for affected areas with lots of eczema flare-ups. An eczema cream or lotion that is eczema friendly, for example, is often the best lotion to use on affected areas when compared to a general body lotion. Lotions which are hypoallergenic are also a good choice. Some products, such as Aveeno parabens lotion, Cerave moisturizing cream, and Cetaphil lotion, are designed specifically to be hypoallergenic, anti-itch, and effective for those with eczema.
In general, look for moisturizing lotions which contain ingredients that help eczema-prone skin, including:

oat or shea butter
aloe
glycerin
hyaluronic acid
petrolatum
vitamin E
humectants
niacinamide

When considering lotion and skincare options, make sure to consult with a dermatologist and check out these products with the NEA Seal of Approval.
What kinds of moisturizers are most effective for my eczema?
Not all moisturizing creams are created equal. In fact, there are many types of common moisturizers that aren’t good at helping control your eczema and may even make it flare or get worse. It’s important to understand the differences between the three basic types of moisturizers other than lotion — ointments, creams, and skin barrier creams — so that you can properly hydrate your skin, get the itch relief you need and help keep your symptoms under control.
Moisturizers are classified based on the amount of oil and water they contain. The more oil in a moisturizer, the better it usually is at treating eczema. The best moisturizers to use are the ones that feel “greasy” (ointments and creams), because they contain more oil. These are very effective at keeping moisture in and irritants out.
All moisturizers should also be applied to your hands immediately after washing and gently blotting them dry. For this reason, it’s a good idea to keep moisturizer near every sink in your home and carry a small tube with you at all times, so that you can reapply it throughout the day.
Ointments
Ointments are usually the first choice for eczema treatment. They have the highest oil content of all the products (followed by creams and then lotions), so they don’t generally burn when they’re applied to sensitive skin and are very good at sealing in moisture.
Products high in oil content, such as petroleum jelly and mineral oil, are particularly good for treating eczema. But if you don’t like the way petroleum jelly, Vaseline, mineral oil or other ointments feel on your skin, the next best alternative is a cream. Apply healing ointments to the irritated skin as often as necessary.
Creams
Creams are second to ointments in the amount of oil they contain and are also very good at sealing in moisture. Because relief creams contain less oil, they are also less greasy to the touch. Be sure to read labels carefully — creams sometimes contain stabilizers or preservatives that can irritate your skin. The best eczema creams will advertise that help manage eczema symptoms.
Skin barrier creams
Skin barrier creams are infused with lipids and ceramides, which are naturally occurring substances found in healthy skin barriers.
Lipids make up the building blocks of the structure and function of living cells. Ceramides are naturally occurring lipids in our skin that consist of an oily wax that forms a barrier in our stratum corneum.
The lipids and ceramides found in skin barrier moisturizers form a protective layer on the skin to help lock in moisture while keeping out impurities. This allows eczema skin to heal and become more resistant to symptoms, including burning, dryness and itch.
Apply skin barrier creams only to the skin affected by eczema and under the direction of a qualified healthcare provider.
Skin barrier creams are available by prescription and over-the-counter.
Why is it so important to moisturize after a bath or shower?
Water is an effective way to put moisture back into the skin, but only if you use lukewarm (not hot) water, avoid scrubbing and apply a moisturizer within three minutes after bathing or showering. This last step is very important — if you don’t moisturize immediately afterward, the moisture your skin needs will evaporate and may cause a rebound effect making the skin even more dry.
Some processes such as emollient after a bath or adding colloidal oatmeal to your bath may provide additional eczema relief.
Tips on choosing a moisturizer
Finding a moisturizer that works can be a challenge. What works for one person may not work for another. As your skin’s wellness changes, so can the effectiveness of a product. A manufacturer may also change the formulation of a product from one year to the next. The best eczema lotion, cream or moisturizer is the one that works for you.
Take the following steps when introducing a new product to your skin:

If you know you are allergic to a particular ingredient, check a product’s label before you buy it.
Review the list of moisturizers that have received the National Eczema Association Seal of Acceptance™ to see if the product you are interested in is on it.
The first time you use a new product, apply a small amount (about the size of a pea) to the pulse of your wrist or the crook of your elbow. Do not wash the area for 24 to 48 hours and watch for any allergic reaction, such as redness, a rash, any form of breakouts on the skin, itchiness, pain or flaking.

Some processes such as emollient after a bath or adding colloidal oatmeal to your bath may provide additional eczema relief.
Tips on choosing a moisturizer
Finding a moisturizer that works can be a challenge. What works for one person may not work for another. As the condition of your skin changes so can the effectiveness of a product. A manufacturer may also change the formulation of a product from one year to the next. The best eczema lotion, cream or moisturizer is the one that works for you.
Take the following steps when introducing a new product to your skin:

If you know you are allergic to a particular ingredient, check a product’s label before you buy it.
Review the list of moisturizers that have received the National Eczema Association Seal of Acceptance™ to see if the product you are interested in is on it.
The first time you use a new product apply a small amount (about the size of a pea) to the pulse of your wrist or the crook of your elbow. Do not wash the area for 24 to 48 hours and watch for any allergic reaction, such as redness, a rash, any form of breakouts on the skin, itchiness, pain or flaking.

NEA’s Seal of Acceptance Product Directory will help you find eczema-specific moisturizers, commercial wet wraps and eczema therapy products that help with symptoms.



 











 

                The National Eczema Association is the driving force for an eczema community fueled by knowledge, strengthened through collective action and propelled by the promise for a better future.            





 
                    Facebook                





 
                    Twitter                





 
                    YouTube                





 
                    Instagram                





 
                    Inspire                


 








































 

                National Eczema Association | ​​​​​​​505 San Marin Drive, #B300 | Novato, CA 94945            




 

                415-499-3474 or 800-818-7546            




NEA is a qualified 501(c)(3) EIN 93-0988840
© 2002-2023 National Eczema Association, All rights reserved.




NEA is a qualified 501(c)(3) EIN 93-0988840
© 2002-2023 National Eczema Association, All rights reserved.







            Get the latest news        



Get the latest eczema news delivered to your inbox.



Advances in research and treatments



Lifestyle tips and hacks



Stories from the community








NEA Newsletter Signup with Segmentation
Get the latest eczema news delivered to your inbox.


Email (required)*

zip (required)*



ZIP / Postal Code


What is your primary relationship to eczema?*Select one (required)I am an adult with eczema (18 and over)I am a teen with eczema (13 - 17)I am the parent of a child with eczemaI am a caregiver/partner/spouse of someone with eczemaI am a supporter of someone with eczemaI am an eczema healthcare professionalCorporate interestOtherOpt-in*

I want to receive the latest eczema news in my inbox!

HiddenSF Lead Source* HiddenE-news Opt in

True
NameThis field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged.
 









 







							Please support this website by adding us to your whitelist in your ad blocker. Ads are what helps us bring you premium content! Thank you!
						








 



























