Document Name: role of Liposorb SQO in Protective Cream0
Document link: https://www.atamanchemicals.com/sorbitan-sesquiloleate_u24710/



















SORBITAN SESQUILOLEATE - Ataman Kimya















+90 216 577 10 10
info@atamanchemicals.com


KVKK Politikası
Information Society Services
Human Resources











PRODUCTS











Categories

Detergents, Cosmetics, Disinfectants, Pharmaceutical Chemicals
Water Treatment, Metal and Mining Chemicals
Paint, Construction, Plastics, Rubber Chemicals
Textile, Leather, Paper and Industrial Chemicals
Crop Protection, Food, Feed and Flavor Chemicals
Other Industries







NEWS


CORPORATE


CONTACT

















Quick Search



















PRODUCTS





PRODUCTS
Detergents, Cosmetics, Disinfectants, Pharmaceutical Chemicals
SORBITAN SESQUILOLEATE
Return to Product List




1-9
A-D
E-G
H-M
N-P
Q-S
T-Z



SORBITAN SESQUILOLEATE




SORBITAN SESQUILOLEATE
Sorbitan sesquioleate (SSO) is a sorbitol derivative emulsifier. It is a common emulsifier component in topical corticosteroids, topical antibiotics, topical antifungals, moisturizing creams and lotions and topical retinoids.
CAS NO: 8007-43-0
EC NO: 232-360-1
IUPAC NAMES: (1R)-1-[(2R,3R,4S)-4-hydroxy-3-[(9Z)-octadec-9-enoyloxy]oxolan-2-yl]-2-[(9Z)-octadec-9-enoyloxy]ethyl (9Z)-octadec-9-enoate (2R)-2-[(2R,3R,4S)-3,4-dihydroxyoxolan-2-yl]-2-hydroxyethyl (9Z)-octadec-9-enoate (2R)-2-hydroxy-2-[(2R,3R,4S)-3-hydroxy-4-[(9Z)-octadec-9-enoyloxy]oxolan-2-yl]ethyl (9Z)-octadec-9-enoate
1,4-anhydro-5,6-di-O-oleoyl-D-glucitol
Lonzest™ SOC
Sorbitan Sesquioleate
Sorbitan sesquioleate
Sorbitan, (Z)-9-octadecenoate (2:3)
Sorbitan, (Z)-9-octadecenoate (2:3)
SYNONYMS:
Arlacel C;UNII-0W8RRI5W5A;0W8RRI5W5A;Arlacel 83;Span 83;Protachem SOC
;(2R,3R,4R,5S)-hexane-1,2,3,4,5,6-hexol;(Z)-octadec-9-enoic acid;Glycomul SOC;Liposorb SQ0;Hodag SSO;Montane 83;Emasol 41S;Emulgator 8972;Sorgen 30;Glycomul Soc Special;Crill 16;Nikkol SO 15;Crill K 16;Nissan nonion OP 83;Emsorb 2502Sorbitanum sesquioleylatum;Anhydrohexitol sesquioleate;Nissan nonion OP 83RAT;Anhydrosorbitol sesquioleate;SO 15;Sorbitani sesquioleas [INN-Latin];Sorbitan, 9-octadecenoate (2:3);EINECS 232-360-1;Sorbitan Sesquileate;Sorbitani sesquioleas;Sesquioleate de sorbitan [INN-French];Arlacel 83 (TN);Sesquioleato de sorbitano [INN-Spanish];Sorbitan, (Z)-9-octadecenoate (2:3);Sesquioleate de sorbitan;Sesquioleato de sorbitano;Sorbitan, esters, sesqui-9-octadecenoate, (Z)-;Sorbitan sesquioleate (JP17/NF/INN);Sorbitan sesquioleate. (Compound usually contains also associated fatty acids.);Sorbitan sesquioleate [USAN:INN:BAN:NF];D05282;EC 232-360-1;Q27231186;anhydrohexitol sesquioleate (2:3);anhydrosorbitol sesquioleate (2:3) ;arlacel 83 ;arlacel C ;crill 43 ;emasol 41S ;emsorb 2502 ;emulgator 8972 glycomul SOC;(2R,3R,4R,5S)-hexane-1,2,3,4,5,6-hexol;(Z)-octadec-9-enoic acid ;hodag SSO ;liposorb SQ0 ;liposorb sqo;lonzest SOC ;monemul - 83 ;montane 83 ;nikkol SO-15MV ;nikkol SO-15V ;nissan nonion OP 83 ;nissan nonion OP 83RAT ;protachem SOC ;qo-33-f ;rheodol AO-15V ;sorbirol sq ;sorbitan (Z)-9-octadecenoate (2:3) ;sorbitan, (9Z)-9-octadecenoate (2:3) ;sorbitan, (Z)-9-octadecenoate (2:3) ;sorbitan, esters, sesqui-9-octadecenoate, (Z)-, (2:3) ;sorbitanum sesquioleylatum (2:3);nhydrohexitol sesquioleate;Anhydrosorbitol sesquioleate;Sorbitan sesquioleate;Sorbitan, 9-octadecenoate (2:3);Arlacel 83;Arlacel C;Crill 16;Crill K 16;Emasol 41S;Emsorb 2502;Emulgator 8972;Glycomul SOC;Glycomul Soc Special;Hodag SSO;Liposorb SQ0;Montane 83;Nikkol SO 15;Nissan nonion OP 83;Nissan nonion OP 83RAT;Protachem SOC;SO 15;Sesquioleate de sorbitan;Sesquioleato de sorbitano;Sorbitan, (Z)-9-octadecenoate (2:3);Sorbitani sesquioleas;Sorbitanum sesquioleylatum;Sorgen 30;Span 83;UNII-0W8RRI5W5A;Sorbitan, (9Z)-9-octadecenoate (2:3);Sorbitan, esters, sesqui-9-octadecenoate, (Z)-;Sorbitan, sesquioleate;(9Z)-octadec-9-enoic acid - D-glucitol (3:2);1,4-anhydro-5,6-di-O--(9Z)-octadec-9-enoyl-D-glucitol;nhydrohexitol sesquioleate; Anhydrosorbitol sesquioleate; Sorbitan sesquioleate; Sorbitan, 9-octadecenoate (2:3); Arlacel 83; Arlacel C; Crill 16; Crill K 16; Emasol 41S; Emsorb 2502; Emulgator 8972; Glycomul SOC; Glycomul Soc Special; Hodag SSO; Liposorb SQ0; Montane 83; Nikkol SO 15; Nissan nonion OP 83; Nissan nonion OP 83RAT; Protachem SOC; SO 15; Sesquioleate de sorbitan; Sesquioleato de sorbitano; Sorbitan, (Z)-9-octadecenoate (2:3); Sorbitani sesquioleas; Sorbitanum sesquioleylatum; Sorgen 30; Span 83; UNII-0W8RRI5W5A; Sorbitan, (9Z)-9-octadecenoate (2:3); Sorbitan, esters, sesqui-9-octadecenoate, (Z)-; Sorbitan, sesquioleate; (9Z)-octadec-9-enoic acid - D-glucitol (3:2); 1,4-anhydro-5,6-di-O--(9Z)-octadec-9-enoyl-D-glucitol

Chemical Properties    
Pale yellow or slightly brownish-yellow paste, which becomes a viscous, oily, brownish-yellow liquid at about 25 °C.
Uses    
sorbitan sesquioleate is a surfactant used as an emulsifying agent.
Uses    
Sorbitan sesquioleate is used as an emulsifier in cosmetic and pharmaceutical ointments and creams.
Sorbitan sesquioleate is useful as a stabilizing agent in polymerization process to produce spherical acrylamide beads.[2] It has been used in many topical agents. SSO have recently been implicated in allergic dermatitis.
A mainly oil loving molecule that helps water and oil to mix nicely, aka emulsifier. In itself, it can create water-in-oil emulsions (when water droplets are dispersed in oil), but it is used mostly next to water-loving emulsifiers to create nice and smooth oil-in-water creams.  It can also function as a wetting and dispersing agent helping insoluble particles such as color pigments or inorganic sunscreens (zinc/titanium dioxide) to disperse nice and even in liquids.  
Chemically speaking, this molecule is "halfway" between Sorbitan Oleate and Sorbitan Trioleate, meaning that it is also an attachment of sorbitan (a dehydrated sorbitol (sugar) molecule) with the unsaturated fatty acid Oleic Acid, but in a ratio of 2:3 hence the "Sesqui" part in the molecule's name.
Uses
This medication is used as a moisturizer to treat or prevent dry, rough, scaly, itchy skin and minor skin irritations (e.g., diaper rash, skin burns from radiation therapy). Emollients are substances that soften and moisturize the skin and decrease itching and flaking. Some products (e.g., zinc oxide, white petrolatum) are used mostly to protect the skin against irritation (e.g., from wetness).Dry skin is caused by a loss of water in the upper layer of the skin. Emollients/moisturizers work by forming an oily layer on the top of the skin that traps water in the skin. Petrolatum, lanolin, mineral oil and dimethicone are common emollients. Humectants, including glycerin, lecithin, and propylene glycol, draw water into the outer layer of skin. Many products also have ingredients that soften the horny substance (keratin) that holds the top layer of skin cells together (including urea, alpha hydroxy acids such as lactic/citric/glycolic acid, and allantoin). This helps the dead skin cells fall off, helps the skin keep in more water, and leaves the skin feeling smoother and softer.
Sorbitol-based emulsifiers such as sorbitan sesquioleate (SSO) are commonly used in topical corticosteroids, topical antibiotics, topical antifungals, moisturizing creams and lotions, and topical retinoids.
What is SORBITAN SESQUIOLEATE and where is it found?
This chemical is used as an emulsifier in cosmetic and pharmaceutical ointments and
creams. It is sometimes used as a food additive and can be found in some veterinary
products and household items. Further research may identify additional product or
industrial usages of this chemical.
What Is It?
Sorbitan Stearate, Sorbitan Laurate, Sorbitan Sesquioleate, Sorbitan Oleate, Sorbitan Tristearate, Sorbitan Palmitate and Sorbitan Trioleate are white to tan-colored solids. In cosmetics and personal care products, Sorbitan Esters are used in a variety of products including skin care products, skin cleansing products, moisturizers, eye makeup and other makeup.
Why is it used in cosmetics and personal care products?
Sorbitan Stearate, Sorbitan Laurate, Sorbitan Sesquioleate, Sorbitan Oleate, Sorbitan Tristearate, Sorbitan Palmitate and Sorbitan Trioleate function as surfactant - emulsifying agents.
Scientific Facts: 
The sorbitan esters are produced by reacting the polyol, sorbitol, with a fatty acids (stearic acid, lauric acid, oleic acid, palmitic acid). Both sobitol and the fatty acids are naturally occurring and are used in cosmetic products.
Sorbitan sesquioleate is an additive found in food, veterinary products, and household items.
Sorbitan sesquiester widely used in personal care products. W/O emulsifier, particularly recommended for unsaturated lipid components such as oleyl alcohol or vegetable oils. Dispersing agents for insoluble liquids in other lipophilic liquids. Used as a wetting agent and dispersant for pigments in colour cosmetics and zinc oxide/titanium dioxide in sun care products. Vegetable-derived. Approved natural by Ecocert.
A sorbitol derivative emulsifier used in many topical agents. Sorbitan Sesquioleate is used in a variety of products including skin care products, skin cleansing products, moisturizers, eye makeup and other makeup, primarily as an emollient. It is added to formulas as a skin soother and moisturizer and is derived from sorbitol, a humectant. Sorbitol sesquioleate (SSO) have recently been implicated in allergic dermatitis.

Description:
Sorbitan Sesquioleate is a mixture that usually is obtained by esterification of 2 moles of sorbitol and its mono and di-anhydrides per 3 moles of oleic acid. A suitable antioxidant may also be added. Sorbitan Sesquioleate is used a thickener and emulsifier
Applications:
Sorbitan Sesquioleate is used in foundation products, lipstick products, concealer products, sunscreens, eye shadow products, mascara products, bronzers, highlighter products, blush products, eye liner products, facial powder products, lip gloss products, moisturizers, creams, moisturizers, anti-aging products, foams, lotions, facial cleansers, exfoliants, scrubs, antiperspirants, and deodorants.
Sorbitan Sesquioleate is widely used as W/O emulsifiers and when used in combination with Sorbitan Sesquioleate they contribute to the overall stability of O/W emulsions. Manipulation of the Span/Tween ratio produces emulsifying systems of various HLB values, allowing the emulsification of a wide range of oils and waxes. Sorbitan Sesquioleate is a liquid W/O emulsifier and O/W emulsion stabiliser used in applications such as protective baby care and emollient creams. Recommended topical usage levels of 0.5-5%.
Sorbitan sesquioleate (CAS No 8007-43-0) is a mixture of the partial esters of sorbitol and its monoand di-anhydrides with oleic acid. Sorbitan esters being nonionic surface agents are used as excipients in veterinary medicinal products.
Sorbitan Sesquioleate is a mixture that usually is obtained by esterification of 2 moles of sorbitol and its mono and di-anhydrides per 3 moles of oleic acid. A suitable antioxidant may also be added. Sorbitan Sesquioleate is used a thickener and emulsifier.
Usage:
1.It can be used as an emulsifier in the preparation of creams, emulsions and ointments.
2.This product is used as emulsifier, solubilizer, stabilizer, softener and antistatic agent in medicine, cosmetics, textile and paint industry.
Appearance    yellow viscous liquid
Acid Value (mg KOH/g)    ≤14.0
Saponification Value(mg KOH/g)    143-165
Hydroxyl Value(mg KOH/g)    182-220
Moisture (%)    ≤1.5
Sorbitan sesquioleate is an additive found in food, veterinary products, and household items. Sorbitan esters being nonionic surface agents are used as excipients in veterinary medicinal products. Emollient ester of this compound offers a smooth feel ‘coated‘ after-feel to the skin and is used in cosmetics. It acts as a emulsification and lubricating agent.
Used in leather and hide tanning and processing; [Reference #1] Sorbitan fatty acid esters are used as surfactants, emulsifiers, buffering agents, and corrosion inhibitors in a variety of pesticide formulations; [ExPub: EPA - Inert Reassessments] Used to make rubber, resins, polymers, cleaning and maintenance products, cosmetics-personal care products, adhesives, textile dying-finishing-impregnating products, coatings-paints-thinners, inks, metalworking fluid concentrates, fertilizers, construction chemicals, tires, lubricants-lubricant additives-greases, water treatment chemicals, mining chemicals, metal cleaners-treatment products, oil and gas drilling and production, leather dying-finishing-impregnating products, functional fluids, binders-release agents, explosives, agrochemicals, floor care products, antifreeze-de-icing products, as laboratory reagent, blowing agent, intermediate, and fuel;
Sorbitan sesquioleate is a liquid sorbitan sesquioleate for use in skin care and color cosmetics. It is part of a broad range of ester materials including sorbitan esters, mono and diglycerides, and polyoxyethylene sorbitol esters. This grade is used as a wetting agent and dispersant for pigments in colour cosmetics and zinc oxide/titanium dioxide in suncare products.
These nonionic surfactants can function as emulsifiers, detergents, spreading or dispersing agents. These product finds wide use in the personal care industry. They offer many advantages over ionic surfactants such as soaps, including increased stability, formulating flexibility, wider compatibility and are approved natural by Ecocert.
Used in a variety of products including skin care products, skin cleansing products, moisturizers, eye makeup and other makeup, primarily as an emollient. It is added to formulas as a skin soother and moisturizer.
SORBITAN, SESQUIOLEATE is a low HLB, w/o emulsifier suggested for use in cosmetic formulations and household products.
SORBITAN, SESQUIOLEATE is also used in emulsifying explosives.
Sorbitan sesquioleate (SSO) is a mixture of monoestersand diesters of oleic acid and anhydride products derivedfrom sorbitol (1). Since the 1990s, SSO at a concentra-tion of 5% has been added as an emulsifier to fragrancemix I (FM I) in order to ensure satisfactory dispersionof the eight constituents of the mix in the petrolatumvehicle (2). Furthermore, the addition of SSO to the singleconstituents of FM I in breakdown testing increases thefrequency of positive allergic reactions.
SSO is a frequently used emulsifier, and is found in top-ical steroids (4), wound dressings (5), and various otherconsumer products, including diapers, toothpastes, andcreams.

Sorbitan sesquioleate is a nonionic surfactant. It is a sorbitol derivative emulsifier used in many topical agents.
Sorbitan sesquioleate is a mixture of mono and diesters of oleic acid and extol anhydrides derived from sorbitol. It is used as a surfactant and an emulsifier in cosmetics. It acts sometimes as a contact allergen, particularly in leg ulcer patients. It is also responsible for false-positive patch test reactions to haptens, with which some allergen providers emulgated, such as parabens mix, fragrance mix, Amerchol L101, and ethylene-urea /melamine formaldehyde.
Sorbitan Sesquioleate CAS 8007-43-0 is pale yellow viscous liquid, insoluble in cold water, hot water. soluble in mineral oil and ethyl acetate.
Specification
Appearance                               Pale yellow viscous liquid
Fatty acid, %                            74.00 ~ 80.00
Sorbitol, %                            22.00 ~ 28.00
Acid value, mgKOH/g                      ≤14.00
Saponification value, mgKOH/g    143.00 ~ 165.00
Hydroxyl value, mgKOH/g            182.00 ~ 220.00
Moisture,%                            ≤1.00
Application
This product in medicine, cosmetics, textile, paint industry as emulsifier, solvent, stabilizer, softener, antistatic agent.
Used as emulsifier and stabilizer in food, cosmetic, and other industry.
What are some products that may contain sorbitan sesquioleate?
•     Baby Products
•     Cosmetics
•     Household Products
Product Details:
Appearance: Viscous Oily Liquid
Color: Yellow to Amber
Acid Value, mgKOH/gm: 12.0 max
Saponification Value, mgKOH/gm: 145 - 160
Hydroxyl Value, mgKOH/gm: 185 - 195
Oleic Acid Content, %: 70.0 min
HLB Value: 4.5
Chemical Name: SORBITAN SESQUIOLEATE, High Oleic Grade
CAS Number: 8007-43-0
Applications:
The product made from 70% min Oleic acid carries the advantage of the performance of the product in the specialty applications
Used for preparing water in oil emulsifiers with a high degree of absorbency, good resistance to temperature fluctuations
Opacifiers for hydro carbon free ointment, Auxiliary emulsifiers for bees wax/borax and divalent soap systems such as calcium and magnesium Stearate, consumer household aerosols and an oil in water co-emulsifier for cosmetic, industrial oil and textile oils
Sorbitan sesquioleate is an essential ingredient in many lotions and other skin-care products. It acts as a humectant to bind moisture, thicken the product, and stabilize the mixture of water and oils. This stabilization effect is why Sorbitan sesquioleate is known as an emulsifier — it allows two liquids, which normally would not blend, to form a stable mix called an emulsion. Many everyday products use this to keep a cream base from breaking apart during long-term storage in vials, jars, and bottles. Separation may still occur, however, when products are subjected to extreme hot or cold temperatures.
The source of Sorbitan sesquioleate is berries and other vegetable matter. The compound is derived as a natural alcohol, combining a sugar alcohol called sorbitol with fatty acids from vegetables. Sorbitol can be found in natural sources such as corn, plums, and many other common foods. When the sorbitol and fatty acids react, they create a new compound that retains the humectifying properties of sorbitol, and makes the alcohol an effective skin moisturizer and softener. This is why it is often used in anti-aging formulas, rash treatment creams, and dry skin treatments. The moisturizing properties are also useful in sunscreen lotions and creams.
The compound is also used in some cosmetics. Sorbitan sesquioleate can act as a binding agent for cream-based cosmetics, such as cream eyeshadow or liquid foundation. It can also act as a moisturizing agent to reduce the dehydrating effects caused by repeated use of some cosmetics, and to reduce skin flaking caused by wearing makeup over long periods of time. Lotion-based medical treatments and salves, such as athlete's foot medications, may also include some form of sorbitol-based emulsifier.
Sorbitan sesquioleate has a low risk of allergic reaction and is generally considered a gentle substance, safe for topical use. Some users have reported skin reactions, including irritation, redness, and hives. These reactions are usually mild, rare, and treatable by conventional methods. Many baby products use the compound, and little to no adverse effect has been reported on infant skin.
The Environment Canada Domestic Substance List has raised concerns about Sorbitan sesquioleate as a possible environmental toxin. Many cosmetic products identify the compound as an environmentally-safe plant emulsifier, however. Other, non-naturally derived stearates may pose issues with water pollution or environmental toxicity — such as glycol stearate, which combines natural stearate alcohols with toxic ethylene glycol to produce sheened, pearl-like textures in products like shampoos.

Features and benefits:
Liquid and easy to handle
Good environmental & health profile
Highly efficient emulsification
Allows high loading of pigments/fillers
Low foaming; absence of surface defects
Sorbitan sesquioleate is an sorbitan ester chosen for its suitability as a guar slurry aid. Sorbitan sesquioleate allows for quick hydration of guar slurries and increases stability. It is FDA approved for use in indirect food contact applications and is highly effective in a wide range of formulations. Sorbitan sesquioleate is also used as an emulsifier, creating stable water/oil emulsions. Croda’s Span range of emulsifiers can be produced from a variety of feedstocks to diverse specifications and requirements, including peroxide free or reduction/oxidation friendly emulsifiers.
Sorbitol is a white, sweetish, hygroscopic, crystalline sugar alcohol of six-carbon. It is found naturally in various berries and fruits. Or it is prepared synthetically by high-pressure catalytic hydrogenation of glucose sugar derived from cornstarch. It melts at 93 to 98 C depending on the form. It is used as a a sweetening agent, food additive, toothpaste, tobacco, toiletries and in cosmetics. It is used for vitamin-C fermentation. It is used as a excipient and intravenous osmotic diuretic in pharmaceutical fields. It is also used in the manufacture of polyethers for polyurethanes and surfactants. The term sorbitan describes the anhydride form of sorbitol, whose fatty acids are lipophilic whereas sorbitol body is hydrophilic. This bifunctionality in one molecule provides the basic properties useful in cleaners, detergents, polymer additives, and textile industry as emulsifiers, wetting agents, and viscosity modifiers. Sorbitan esters are rather lipophilic (or hydrophobic) surfactants exhibiting low HLB (Hydrophilic-Lipophilic Balance) values; having an affinity for, tending to combine with, or capable of dissolving in lipids (or water-insoluble). While, the ethoxylated sorbitan esters are hydrophilics exhibiting high HLB values; having an affinity for water; readily absorbing or dissolving in water. The type of fatty acid and the mole number of ethylene oxide provides diverse HLB values for proper applications.
Sorbitan Sesquioleate is w/o emulsifier, particularly recommended for unsaturated lipid components such as oleyl alcohol or vegetable oils. Dispersing agent for insoluble liquids in other lipophilic liquids. Used as wetting agent and dispersant for pigments in color cosmetics and zinc oxide/titanium dioxide in sun care products. Sorbitan Sesquioleate is suitable for after-sun, baby care, bath applications, bath products, body washes, color cosmetics, creams & lotions-skin care, eye products, facial care, facial make-up, feet, hands & nails, hair care, lip & eye care, lip products, male grooming, skin care creams as well as lotions, specific skin care treatments, sun care products and sun protection.

Applications/Recommended for:
Sun protection
After sun products
Skin care (Facial care, Facial cleansing, Body care, Baby care)
Shower & bath
Foot care
Facial care
Nail treatments
Lipsticks & Glosses
Eye Care
Gels & creams
Baby care
Hair care (Shampoos, Conditioners & Styling)
Sorbitan sesquioleate (SSO) has been added to fragrance mix I (FM I) as an emulsifier since the 1990s. Being a contact allergen itself, SSO has the potential to cause false-positive reactions to FM I. Recent results obtained with selected FM I-positive patients have shown that 5% have concomitant positive reactions to SSO.
Sorbitan sesquioleate is a mixture of sorbitan fatty acid esters that is obtained by esterifying formally 2 moles of sorbitol and / or its mono- and dianhydrides ( sorbitan , isosorbide ) with 3 moles of oleic acid .
Sorbitan sesquioleate is used as a dispersant or emulsifier in human and veterinary medicinal products and in cosmetics as well as in other technical applications.
Sorbitan sesquioleate used pharmaceutically contains in the fatty acid fraction 65.0 to 88.0% oleic acid, also linoleic acid (maximum 18.0%), palmitic acid (maximum 16.0%), palmitoleic acid (maximum 8.0%), stearic acid (maximum 6, 0%), myristic acid (maximum 5.0%), linolenic acid (maximum 4.0%) and fatty acids with a chain length of more than 18 carbon atoms (maximum 4.0%). Pharmaceutical sorbitan sesquioleate is a pale yellow to pale brownish-yellow paste that turns into a viscous, oily, amber-colored liquid at around 25 ° C. The relative density is about 0.99 and the HLB value is 3.7.

Characteristic of product
1. Low viscosity Organic emulsifier
It can be dissolved in oil and dispersed in water into a relatively steady emulsion, because it can be dispersed into steady emulsion in water, and can be used as the main or auxiliary emulsifier in the preparation of cream and emulsion.
2. Cosmestic emulsion
It is specially recommended for the preparation of spray emulsion. The product has good stability, good atomization and very clean coating, and the operation process is so simple that it can be operated in cold or heated.

Application:
Surfactants in cosmetics
Skin care: cream, lotion;
Spray emulsion;
Makeup remover or bath oil.
Sorbitan Sesquioleate is used in a variety of products including skin care products, skin cleansing products, moisturizers, eye makeup and other makeup, primarily as an emollient. It is added to formulas as a skin soother and moisturizer.
Also used in after-sun,baby care,bath applications,bath products & body washes.
Soluble in ethanol, ethyl acetate, petroleum ether and toluene, insoluble in water.With emulsification, stability, lubrication, thickening and other properties,and belongs to W/O type emulsifier.
* Emulsifier for water-in-oil formulations and also for emulsifying hydrophilic actives in an oil phase.
* Has good dispersing and solvent properties for pigments and inorganic sunscreen actives.
* Used in skin care, sun care and color cosmetics.
Consumer Uses
Sorbitan sesquioleate is used in the following products: washing & cleaning products, plant protection products, lubricants and greases, adhesives and sealants, polishes and waxes, fertilisers and coating products.
Other release to the environment of this substance is likely to occur from: indoor use (e.g. machine wash liquids/detergents, automotive care products, paints and coating or adhesives, fragrances and air fresheners), outdoor use, indoor use in close systems with minimal release (e.g. cooling liquids in refrigerators, oil-based electric heaters) and outdoor use in close systems with minimal release (e.g. hydraulic liquids in automotive suspension, lubricants in motor oil and break fluids).
Article service life
Other release to the environment of this substance is likely to occur from: indoor use in long-life materials with low release rate (e.g. flooring, furniture, toys, construction materials, curtains, foot-wear, leather products, paper and cardboard products, electronic equipment), outdoor use in long-life materials with low release rate (e.g. metal, wooden and plastic construction and building materials), indoor use in long-life materials with high release rate (e.g. release from fabrics, textiles during washing, removal of indoor paints) and outdoor use in long-life materials with high release rate (e.g. tyres, treated wooden products, treated textile and fabric, brake pads in trucks or cars, sanding of buildings (bridges, facades) or vehicles (ships)).
Sorbitan sesquioleate can be found in complex articles, with no release intended: vehicles.
Sorbitan sesquioleate can be found in products with material based on: plastic (e.g. food packaging and storage, toys, mobile phones) and rubber (e.g. tyres, shoes, toys).
Sorbitan sesquioleate is intended to be released from scented: clothes.
Widespread uses by professional workers
Sorbitan sesquioleate is used in the following products: washing & cleaning products, polishes and waxes and plant protection products.
Sorbitan sesquioleate is used in the following areas: formulation of mixtures and/or re-packaging.
Other release to the environment of this substance is likely to occur from: indoor use (e.g. machine wash liquids/detergents, automotive care products, paints and coating or adhesives, fragrances and air fresheners) and outdoor use.
Formulation or re-packing
Sorbitan sesquioleate is used in the following products: polymers, lubricants and greases, textile treatment products and dyes and cosmetics and personal care products.
Release to the environment of this substance can occur from industrial use: formulation of mixtures and formulation in materials.
Uses at industrial sites
Sorbitan sesquioleate is used in the following products: washing & cleaning products, metal surface treatment products, polymers, textile treatment products and dyes, pH regulators and water treatment products and leather treatment products.
Sorbitan sesquioleate is used for the manufacture of: pulp, paper and paper products and plastic products.
Release to the environment of this substance can occur from industrial use: in processing aids at industrial sites, in the production of articles, as an intermediate step in further manufacturing of another substance (use of intermediates) and as processing aid.
SORBITAN SESQUIOLEATE is classified as :
Emulsifying
CAS Number    8007-43-0
EINECS/ELINCS No:    232-360-1
COSING REF No:    38185
INN Name:    serbitan sesquioleate
Chem/IUPAC Name:    Sorbitan, (Z)-9-octadecenoate (2:3)

Chemical Properties    Pale yellow or slightly brownish-yellow paste, which becomes a viscous, oily, brownish-yellow liquid at about 25 °C.
Uses    Sorbitan Sesquioleate is a low HLB, w/o emulsifier suggested for use in cosmetic formulations and household products. Also used in emulsifying explosives.
Uses    sorbitan sesquioleate is a surfactant used as an emulsifying agent.
Uses    Sorbitan sesquioleate is used as an emulsifier in cosmetic and pharmaceutical ointments and creams.
Sorbitan Sesquioleate functions as a w/o emulsifier and dispersant. Applications of Sorbitan Sesquioleate include skin care and decorative cosmetics.
Sorbitan sesquiester widely used in personal care products. W/O emulsifier, particularly recommended for unsaturated lipid components such as oleyl alcohol or vegetable oils. Dispersing agents for insoluble liquids in other lipophilic liquids. Used as a wetting agent and dispersant for pigments in colour cosmetics and zinc oxide/titanium dioxide in sun care products. Vegetable-derived.
Applications
Bath, Shower & Soaps
Body Care
Eye Colour
Eye Contour Care
Face / Neck Skin Care
Face Colour
Lip Care
Lip Colour
Sun Protection
Functions
Dispersing Agents
Emulsion Stabilisers
Pigment Wetters
Emulsifiers
Surfactants / Detergents
Background
Sorbitan sesquioleate  is a mixed ester of oleic acid and hexitol anhydrides derived from sorbitol used as emulsifier.
Sorbitan sesquioleate are oil-soluble, water-dispersible, nonionic surfactants which function as water-in-oil emulsifiers.
Uses
Cosmetics
Pharmaceutical creams and lotions
Polysorb Hydrate
Density :    0.989 g/mL at 25 °C(lit.)
vapor pressure :    0.81 psi ( 20 °C)
refractive index :    n20/D 1.478(lit.)
Flash point::    113 °C
solubility :    Dispersible in water, soluble in fatty oils, slightly soluble in ethanol.
form :    Viscous Liquid
color :    Pale Yellow
Water Solubility :    Insoluble in cold water, hot water. soluble in mineral oil and ethyl acetate.

Sorbitan sesquioleate  is a liquid sorbitan sesquioleate for use in skin care and color cosmetics. It is part of a broad range of ester materials including sorbitan esters, mono and diglycerides, and polyoxyethylene sorbitol esters. This grade is used as a wetting agent and dispersant for pigments in colour cosmetics and zinc oxide/titanium dioxide in suncare products.
These nonionic surfactants can function as emulsifiers, detergents, spreading or dispersing agents. These product finds wide use in the personal care industry. They offer many advantages over ionic surfactants such as soaps, including increased stability, formulating flexibility, wider compatibility.
Croda considers the system to be an important progressive step in supporting the palm oil physical supply chain and creating momentum towards segregated sustainable Palm Oil and Palm Kernel Oil material. To that end, sampling will be of the sustainable palm variant, Sorbitan sesquioleate .
Where is sorbitan sesquioleate found?
Sorbitan sesquioleate is an additive found in food, veterinary products, and household items.
What are some products that may contain sorbitan sesquioleate?
Baby Products
Cosmetics
Household Products
Sorbitan sesquioleate is a 100% bio-based, non-ionic surfactant, easy to handle, for use as a W/O emulsifier and O/W co-emulsifier, dispersing agent in non-polar liquids for applications ranging from decorative to industrial coatings and paintings.
Sorbitan Sesquioleate is used as a surfactant and an emulsifier in cosmetics.
Usage:
1.It can be used as an emulsifier in the preparation of creams, emulsions and ointments.
2.This product is used as emulsifier, solubilizer, stabilizer, softener and antistatic agent in medicine, cosmetics, textile and paint industry.
Specification
Appearance                               Pale yellow viscous liquid
Fatty acid, %                            74.00 ~ 80.00
Sorbitol, %                            22.00 ~ 28.00
Acid value, mgKOH/g                      ≤14.00
Saponification value, mgKOH/g    143.00 ~ 165.00
Hydroxyl value, mgKOH/g            182.00 ~ 220.00
Moisture,%                            ≤1.00
Application
This product in medicine, cosmetics, textile, paint industry as emulsifier, solvent, stabilizer, softener, antistatic agent.
Sorbitan Sesquioleate CAS 8007-43-0 is pale yellow viscous liquid, insoluble in cold water, hot water. soluble in mineral oil and ethyl acetate.
Soluble in mineral and vegetable oils, and mineral spirits and toluene. It is insoluble in water.
Use: EMULSIFYING





Share !






 

















E-NEWSLETTER
















SHORTCUTS

PRODUCTS
NEWS
CORPORATE
HUMAN RESOURCES
BLOG
CATALOG REQUEST



CONTACT

CONTACT US
SUGGESTION AND COMPLAINT
SUPPORT
KVKK POLİTİKASI




SOCIAL NETWORKS

FACEBOOK TWITTER INSTAGRAM YOUTUBE 







                2020 © All rights reserved by ATAMAN KİMYA. No content and images can be used for permission.            











1980 yılında Cengiz Tuncel, Şelale Kimya' yı devralmış ve 2006 yılında hammadde ithalatı ve ihracatı amacıyla ATAMAN Kimya Ltd' yi kurmuştur. Ataman Kimya 2009 yılında Cengiz Tuncel tarafından bir sonraki nesile devredilmiştir ve 2020 yılında ATAMAN Kimya A.Ş adını almıştır.













