Document Name: role of MIGLYOL 812 in Cold Cream1
Document link: https://www.uspharmacist.com/article/betamethasone-valerate-01-and-neomycin-sulfate-06-gel-cream























Betamethasone Valerate 0.1% and Neomycin Sulfate 0.6% Gel-Cream







































Pharmacy Practice



Affordable Medicines
Compliance
Compounding
Drug Approvals
Geriatrics


Hospital/Health System
In-Pharmacy Vaccines
Law
Medication Management
News & Trends


OTC
Pharmacist Resources
Specialty Pharmacy
Technology





Disease State



Allergy
Autoimmune
Breast Cancer
Cardiovascular
Cold & Flu


COVID-19
Dermatology
Diabetes
Gastroenterology
Hematology


HIV/AIDS
Infectious Disease
Infusion
Lung Cancer
Mental Health


mRNA Technology
Neurology
Oncology
Ophthalmology
Orthopedics


Pain Management Pediatrics
Respiratory
Schizophrenia
Urology/Nephrology
Women’s Health





Health Awareness Month


Videos


Patient Teaching Aid


Publications



Featured Issue
Featured Supplements





Conference Coverage


Continuing Education




Subscribe






 COVID-19 Resources 
























Published March 20, 2013

COMPOUNDING

Betamethasone Valerate 0.1% and Neomycin Sulfate 0.6% Gel-Cream

Loyd V. Allen, Jr., PhDProfessor EmeritusCollege of Pharmacy, University of OklahomaOklahoma City. Oklahoma



US Pharm. 2013;38(3):20-21.

Method of Preparation: Note—It may be necessary to adjust the neomycin sulfate quantity based upon the assay of the specific lot being used.
Calculate the quantity of each ingredient for the amount to be
prepared. Accurately weigh or measure each ingredient. Mix the
polyethylene glycol (PEG) 300 with the Miglyol 812. Dissolve the
Pluronic F127 and neomycin sulfate in about 60 mL of purified water at
refrigerated temperature. Mix both solutions. Add sufficient cold
purified water to final volume and mix well. Store in a refrigerator
until all air bubbles have disappeared. Package and label.
Use: This preparation has been used for the treatment of minor skin disorders.
Packaging: Package in tight, light-resistant containers.
Labeling: For external use only. Keep out of reach of children. Discard after ____ [time period].
Stability: A beyond-use date of up to 30 days may be used for this preparation.1
Quality Control: Quality-control assessment may
include theoretical weight compared with actual weight, pH, specific
gravity, active drug assay, color, texture–surface, texture–spatula
spread, appearance, feel, rheologic properties, and physical
observations.2
Discussion: Betamethasone valerate (C24H31FO6,
MW 434.50) is a synthetic fluorinated corticosteroid that occurs as a
white to practically white, odorless powder. It melts at about 190°C
with decomposition and is freely soluble in acetone, soluble in alcohol
(1 g in 16 mL), and practically insoluble in water (1 g in 10,000 mL).1 Betamethasone valerate is used as a topical anti-inflammatory agent.
Neomycin sulfate is an aminoglycoside antibiotic obtained from cultures of Streptomyces fradiae.
It occurs as a white to slightly yellow, hygroscopic powder that is
freely soluble in water and very slightly soluble in alcohol. It should
be stored in tight, light-resistant containers. Neomycin sulfate has a
potency equivalent of not less than 600 mcg of neomycin per mg,
calculated on the dried basis.1,3
PEG 300 (Carbowax, polyoxyethylene glycol) is an addition polymer of
ethylene oxide and water. It occurs as a clear, colorless or slightly
yellow-colored, viscous liquid with a slight, characteristic odor and a
bitter, slightly burning taste. The density of PEG 300 is 1.11, and the
freezing point is –15°C to –8°C. It is soluble in water and miscible in
all ratios with other PEGs; it also is soluble in acetone, alcohols,
glycerin, and glycols.4
Miglyol 812, a medium-chain triglyceride (MCT), is the fixed oil extracted from the hard, dried fraction of the endosperm of Cocos nucifera L. or the dried endosperm of Elaeis guineensis
Jacq. MCTs consist of a mixture of triglycerides of saturated fatty
acids, mainly caprylic acid and capric acid. They occur as a colorless
to slightly yellowish, oily liquid that is practically odorless and
tasteless and solidifies at about 0°C. MCTs are used in oral,
parenteral, and topical formulations as emulsifying, solvent,
suspending, and therapeutic agents. Low-density polyethylene should not
be used as the packaging material, as MCTs will readily penetrate the
plastic (especially at high temperatures) and result in an oily film on
the outside of the container. Also, polyvinylchloride should be tested
for compatibility, since MCTs can dissolve some plasticizers, such as
phthalates, out of the plastic container.5
Pluronic F127 is a poloxamer. Poloxamers are a series of closely
related block copolymers of ethylene oxide and propylene oxide that are
used as emulsifying agents, solubilizing agents, and wetting agents.
Poloxamers generally are white-colored, waxy, free-flowing granules or
cast solids that are practically odorless and tasteless. The pH of a
2.5% w/v aqueous solution is in the range of 6.0 to 7.4. Poloxamers are
stable and aqueous solutions are stable in the presence of acids,
alkalis, and metal ions, but the aqueous solutions support mold growth.
Poloxamer 407 (Pluronic F127) is generally available in powdered form.
It is odorless or may have a very mild odor. It melts at about 56°C and
is freely soluble in water, alcohol, and isopropyl alcohol.6
Purified water is water that is obtained by distillation, ion
exchange, reverse osmosis, or some other suitable process. It is
miscible with most polar solvents and is chemically stable in all
physical states (ice, liquid, and steam).7
REFERENCES

1. U.S. Pharmacopeia 35/National Formulary 30. Rockville, MD: U.S. Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc; 2012:344-350,1131.


2. Allen LV Jr. Standard operating procedure for performing physical quality assessment of ointments/creams/gels. IJPC. 1998;2:308-309.


3. McEvoy GK, ed. AHFS Drug Information 2012. Bethesda, MD: American Society of Health-System Pharmacists; 2012:3497-3498.


4. Wallick D. Polyethylene glycol. In: Rowe RC, Sheskey PJ, Quinn ME, eds. Handbook of Pharmaceutical Excipients. 6th ed. Washington, DC: American Pharmaceutical Association; 2009:517-522.


5. Moss G. Medium-chain triglycerides. In: Rowe RC, Sheskey PJ, Quinn ME, eds. Handbook of Pharmaceutical Excipients. 6th ed. Washington, DC: American Pharmaceutical Association; 2009:429-431.


6. Collett JH. Poloxamer. In: Rowe RC, Sheskey PJ, Quinn ME, eds. Handbook of Pharmaceutical Excipients. 6th ed. Washington, DC: American Pharmaceutical Association; 2009:506-509.


7. Dubash D, Shah U. Water. In: Rowe RC, Sheskey PJ, Cook WG, Fenton ME, eds. Handbook of Pharmaceutical Excipients. 7th ed. Washington, DC: American Pharmaceutical Association; 2012:880-884.
To comment on this article, contact rdavidson@uspharmacist.com.



                            Read More On:
                            COMPOUNDING




X













April 2023
In This Issue
Digital Magazine
Archives
Subscription









Related CE


$6.97 Per CE Exam or $59 for 12 Lessons



USP General Chapter <800>: A Pharmacy Professional’s Guide to Handling and Compounding Hazardous Drugs


USP General Chapter <800>: A Pharmacy Professional’s Guide to Handling and Compounding Hazardous Drugs



View More CE






Related Content



Piroxicam 40 mg Troches


Treating Burns in the Pharmacy


Advances in Wound Management


Baclofen 2%, Gabapentin 6%, and Clonidine Hydrochloride 0.1% in Pluronic Lecithin Organogel














                        
                    












Advertising Contacts
Editorial Staff
Professional Organizations
Submitting a Manuscript
Media Kit





About Us
Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Do Not Sell My Personal InformationManage Preferences



Careers
Classifieds






                    Copyright © 2000 - 2023 Jobson Medical Information LLC unless otherwise noted. All rights reserved. Reproduction in whole or in part without permission is prohibited.

                















×
Full Image



















