Document Name: role of ABIL Wax 2434 in Cold Cream2
Document link: https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9284/5/2/34








Cosmetics | Free Full-Text | Alkenones as a Promising Green Alternative for Waxes in Cosmetics and Personal Care Products





























































































































Next Article in Journal
From Mice to Men: An Evolutionary Conserved Breakdown of the Epidermal Calcium Gradient and Its Impact on the Cornified Envelope
Next Article in Special Issue
Perspective: Stabilizing the Microbiome Skin-Gut-Brain Axis with Natural Plant Botanical Ingredients in Cosmetics







Previous Article in Journal
Absorption and Photo-Stability of Substituted Dibenzoylmethanes and Chalcones as UVA Filters
Previous Article in Special Issue
Labeling of Cosmetic Products








Journals




Active Journals
Find a Journal
Proceedings Series





Topics



Information




For Authors
For Reviewers
For Editors
For Librarians
For Publishers
For Societies
For Conference Organizers


Open Access Policy
Institutional Open Access Program
Special Issues Guidelines
Editorial Process
Research and Publication Ethics
Article Processing Charges
Awards
Testimonials





Author Services



Initiatives




Sciforum
MDPI Books
Preprints.org
Scilit
SciProfiles
Encyclopedia
JAMS
Proceedings Series






About




Overview
Contact
Careers
News
Blog






Sign In / Sign Up





Notice





You can make submissions to other journals
here.




clear





Notice

You are accessing a machine-readable page. In order to be human-readable, please install an RSS reader.





Continue
Cancel



clear




All articles published by MDPI are made immediately available worldwide under an open access license. No special
permission is required to reuse all or part of the article published by MDPI, including figures and tables. For
articles published under an open access Creative Common CC BY license, any part of the article may be reused without
permission provided that the original article is clearly cited. For more information, please refer to
https://www.mdpi.com/openaccess.




Feature papers represent the most advanced research with significant potential for high impact in the field. A Feature
Paper should be a substantial original Article that involves several techniques or approaches, provides an outlook for
future research directions and describes possible research applications.


Feature papers are submitted upon individual invitation or recommendation by the scientific editors and must receive
positive feedback from the reviewers.




Editor’s Choice articles are based on recommendations by the scientific editors of MDPI journals from around the world.
Editors select a small number of articles recently published in the journal that they believe will be particularly
interesting to readers, or important in the respective research area. The aim is to provide a snapshot of some of the
most exciting work published in the various research areas of the journal.





                        You seem to have javascript disabled. Please note that many of the page functionalities won't work as expected without javascript enabled.
                    












clear


search


menu


















Journals







Active Journals




Find a Journal




Proceedings Series









Topics


Information






For Authors


For Reviewers


For Editors


For Librarians


For Publishers


For Societies


For Conference Organizers






Open Access Policy


Institutional Open Access Program


Special Issues Guidelines


Editorial Process


Research and Publication Ethics


Article Processing Charges


Awards


Testimonials








Author Services


Initiatives







Sciforum




MDPI Books




Preprints.org




Scilit




SciProfiles




Encyclopedia




JAMS




Proceedings Series









About







Overview




Contact




Careers




News




Blog












Sign In / Sign Up
Submit




 





 

Search for Articles:




Title / Keyword





Author / Affiliation / Email





Journal


All Journals

Acoustics


Actuators


Administrative Sciences


Adolescents


Advances in Respiratory Medicine


Aerospace


Agriculture


AgriEngineering


Agrochemicals


Agronomy


AI


Air


Algorithms


Allergies


Alloys


Analytica


Analytics


Anatomia


Anesthesia Research


Animals


Antibiotics


Antibodies


Antioxidants


Applied Biosciences


Applied Mechanics


Applied Microbiology


Applied Nano


Applied Sciences


Applied System Innovation (ASI)


AppliedChem


AppliedMath


Aquaculture Journal


Architecture


Arthropoda


Arts


Astronomy


Atmosphere


Atoms


Audiology Research


Automation


Axioms


Bacteria


Batteries


Behavioral Sciences


Beverages


Big Data and Cognitive Computing (BDCC)


BioChem


Bioengineering


Biologics


Biology


Biology and Life Sciences Forum


Biomass


Biomechanics


BioMed


Biomedicines


BioMedInformatics


Biomimetics


Biomolecules


Biophysica


Biosensors


BioTech


Birds


Blockchains


Brain Sciences


Buildings


Businesses


C


Cancers


Cardiogenetics


Catalysts


Cells


Ceramics


Challenges


ChemEngineering


Chemistry


Chemistry Proceedings


Chemosensors


Children


Chips


CivilEng


Clean Technologies (Clean Technol.)


Climate


Clinical and Translational Neuroscience (CTN)


Clinics and Practice


Clocks & Sleep


Coasts


Coatings


Colloids and Interfaces


Colorants


Commodities


Complications


Compounds


Computation


Computer Sciences & Mathematics Forum


Computers


Condensed Matter


Conservation


Construction Materials


Corrosion and Materials Degradation (CMD)


Cosmetics


COVID


Crops


Cryptography


Crystals


Current Issues in Molecular Biology (CIMB)


Current Oncology


Dairy


Data


Dentistry Journal


Dermato


Dermatopathology


Designs


Diabetology


Diagnostics


Dietetics


Digital


Disabilities


Diseases


Diversity


DNA


Drones


Drugs and Drug Candidates (DDC)


Dynamics


Earth


Ecologies


Econometrics


Economies


Education Sciences


Electricity


Electrochem


Electronic Materials


Electronics


Encyclopedia


Endocrines


Energies


Eng


Engineering Proceedings


 Entropy


Environmental Sciences Proceedings


Environments


Epidemiologia


Epigenomes


European Burn Journal (EBJ)


European Journal of Investigation in Health, Psychology and Education (EJIHPE)


Fermentation


Fibers


FinTech


Fire


Fishes


Fluids


Foods


Forecasting


Forensic Sciences


Forests


Fossils


Foundations


Fractal and Fractional (Fractal Fract)


Fuels


Future


Future Internet


Future Pharmacology


Future Transportation


Galaxies


Games


Gases


Gastroenterology Insights


Gastrointestinal Disorders


Gastronomy


Gels


Genealogy


Genes


Geographies


GeoHazards


Geomatics


Geosciences


Geotechnics


Geriatrics


Gout, Urate, and Crystal Deposition Disease (GUCDD)


Grasses


Hardware


Healthcare


Hearts


Hemato


Hematology Reports


Heritage


Histories


Horticulturae


Hospitals


Humanities


Humans


Hydrobiology


Hydrogen


Hydrology


Hygiene


Immuno


Infectious Disease Reports


Informatics


Information


Infrastructures


Inorganics


Insects


Instruments


International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health (IJERPH)


International Journal of Financial Studies (IJFS)


International Journal of Molecular Sciences (IJMS)


International Journal of Neonatal Screening (IJNS)
 

International Journal of Plant Biology (IJPB)


International Journal of Translational Medicine (IJTM)


International Journal of Turbomachinery, Propulsion and Power (IJTPP)


International Medical Education (IME)


Inventions


IoT


ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information (IJGI)


J


Journal of Ageing and Longevity (JAL)


Journal of Cardiovascular Development and Disease (JCDD)


Journal of Clinical & Translational Ophthalmology (JCTO)


Journal of Clinical Medicine (JCM)


Journal of Composites Science (J. Compos. Sci.)


Journal of Cybersecurity and Privacy (JCP)


Journal of Developmental Biology (JDB)


Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Analyses (JETA)


Journal of Functional Biomaterials (JFB)


Journal of Functional Morphology and Kinesiology (JFMK)


Journal of Fungi (JoF)


Journal of Imaging (J. Imaging)


Journal of Intelligence (J. Intell.)


Journal of Low Power Electronics and Applications (JLPEA)


Journal of Manufacturing and Materials Processing (JMMP)


Journal of Marine Science and Engineering (JMSE)


Journal of Molecular Pathology (JMP)


Journal of Nanotheranostics (JNT)


Journal of Nuclear Engineering (JNE)


Journal of Otorhinolaryngology, Hearing and Balance Medicine (OHBM)


Journal of Personalized Medicine (JPM)
 

Journal of Respiration (JoR)


Journal of Risk and Financial Management (JRFM)


Journal of Sensor and Actuator Networks (JSAN)


Journal of Theoretical and Applied Electronic Commerce Research (JTAER)


Journal of Vascular Diseases (JVD)


Journal of Xenobiotics (JoX)


Journal of Zoological and Botanical Gardens (JZBG)


Journalism and Media


Kidney and Dialysis


Kinases and Phosphatases


Knowledge


Land


Languages


Laws


Life


Liquids


Literature


Livers


Logics


Logistics


Lubricants


Lymphatics


Machine Learning and Knowledge Extraction (MAKE)


Machines


Macromol


Magnetism


Magnetochemistry


Marine Drugs


Materials


Materials Proceedings


Mathematical and Computational Applications (MCA)


Mathematics


Medical Sciences


Medical Sciences Forum


Medicina


Medicines


Membranes


Merits


Metabolites


Metals


Meteorology


Methane


Methods and Protocols (MPs)


Metrology


Micro


Microbiology Research


Micromachines


Microorganisms


Microplastics


Minerals


Mining


Modelling


Molbank


Molecules


Multimodal Technologies and Interaction (MTI)


Muscles


Nanoenergy Advances


Nanomanufacturing


Nanomaterials


NDT


Network


Neuroglia


Neurology International


NeuroSci


Nitrogen


Non-Coding RNA (ncRNA)


Nursing Reports


Nutraceuticals


Nutrients


Obesities


Oceans


Onco


Optics


Oral


Organics


Organoids


Osteology


Oxygen


Parasitologia


Particles


Pathogens


Pathophysiology


Pediatric Reports


Pharmaceuticals


Pharmaceutics


Pharmacoepidemiology


Pharmacy


Philosophies


Photochem


Photonics


Phycology


Physchem


Physical Sciences Forum


Physics


Physiologia


Plants


Plasma


Platforms


Pollutants


Polymers


Polysaccharides


Poultry


Powders


Proceedings


Processes


Prosthesis


Proteomes


Psych


Psychiatry International


Psychoactives


Publications


Quantum Beam Science (QuBS)


Quantum Reports


Quaternary


Radiation


Reactions


Receptors


Recycling


Religions


Remote Sensing


Reports


Reproductive Medicine (Reprod. Med.)


Resources


Rheumato


Risks


Robotics


Ruminants


Safety


Sci


Scientia Pharmaceutica (Sci. Pharm.)


Sclerosis


Seeds


Sensors


Separations


Sexes


Signals


Sinusitis


Smart Cities


 Social Sciences


Societies


Software


Soil Systems


Solar


Solids


Spectroscopy Journal


Sports


Standards


Stats


Stresses


Surfaces


Surgeries


Surgical Techniques Development


Sustainability


Sustainable Chemistry


Symmetry


SynBio


Systems


Targets


Taxonomy


Technologies


Telecom


Textiles


Thalassemia Reports


Thermo


Tomography


Tourism and Hospitality


Toxics


Toxins


Transplantology


Trauma Care


Trends in Higher Education


Tropical Medicine and Infectious Disease (TropicalMed)


Universe


Urban Science


Uro


Vaccines


Vehicles


Venereology


Veterinary Sciences


Vibration


Virtual Worlds


Viruses


Vision


Waste


Water


Wind


Women


World


World Electric Vehicle Journal (WEVJ)


Youth


Zoonotic Diseases





Article Type


All Article Types
Article
Review
Communication
Editorial
Book Review
Brief Report
Case Report
Comment
Commentary
Concept Paper
Conference Report
Correction
Creative
Data Descriptor
Discussion
Entry
Essay
Expression of Concern
Extended Abstract
Guidelines
Hypothesis
Interesting Images
Letter
New Book Received
Obituary
Opinion
Perspective
Proceeding Paper
Project Report
Protocol
Registered Report
Reply
Retraction
Short Note
Study Protocol
Systematic Review
Technical Note
Tutorial
Viewpoint



 



 
Advanced Search





 


Section







Special Issue






Volume



Issue



Number



Page










 

Logical OperatorOperator

AND
OR



Search Text



Search Type

All fields
Title
Abstract
Keywords
Authors
Affiliations
Doi
Full Text
References



 


add_circle_outline




remove_circle_outline




 







 


Journals


Cosmetics


Volume 5


Issue 2


10.3390/cosmetics5020034












Submit to this Journal


Review for this Journal


Edit a Special Issue




►
▼
Article Menu




Article Menu



Subscribe SciFeed


Recommended Articles


Related Info Link



Google Scholar





More by Authors Links



on DOAJ




McIntosh, K.



Smith, A.



Young, L. K.



Leitch, M. A.



Tiwari, A. K.



Reddy, C. M.



O’Neil, G. W.



Liberatore, M. W.



Chandler, M.



Baki, G.





on Google Scholar




McIntosh, K.



Smith, A.



Young, L. K.



Leitch, M. A.



Tiwari, A. K.



Reddy, C. M.



O’Neil, G. W.



Liberatore, M. W.



Chandler, M.



Baki, G.





on PubMed




McIntosh, K.



Smith, A.



Young, L. K.



Leitch, M. A.



Tiwari, A. K.



Reddy, C. M.



O’Neil, G. W.



Liberatore, M. W.



Chandler, M.



Baki, G.









/ajax/scifeed/subscribe







Article Views







Citations
-









Table of Contents
















Altmetric


share
Share


announcement
Help


format_quote
Cite


question_answer
Discuss in SciProfiles


thumb_up

...

Endorse


textsms

...

Comment





Need Help?


Support

Find support for a specific problem in the support section of our website.


Get Support



Feedback

Please let us know what you think of our products and services.


Give Feedback



Information

Visit our dedicated information section to learn more about MDPI.


Get Information




clear







JSmol Viewer







clear








first_page


settings


Order Article Reprints







Font Type:


Arial
Georgia
Verdana





Font Size:

Aa
Aa
Aa







Line Spacing:















Column Width:

















Background:


















Open AccessArticle

Alkenones as a Promising Green Alternative for Waxes in Cosmetics and Personal Care Products 


by
Kyle McIntosh 1, Amber Smith 2, Lisa K. Young 3, Michael A. Leitch 4, Amit K. Tiwari 1, Christopher M. Reddy 5, Gregory W. O’Neil 4, Matthew W. Liberatore 3, Mark Chandler 6 and Gabriella Baki 2,*







1
Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, College of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toledo, Toledo, OH 43614, USA


2
Department of Pharmacy Practice, College of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toledo, Toledo, OH 43614, USA


3
Department of Chemical Engineering, College of Engineering, University of Toledo, Toledo, OH 43606, USA


4
Department of Chemistry, Western Washington University, Bellingham, WA 98225, USA


5
Department of Marine Chemistry and Geochemistry, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI), Woods Hole, MA 02543, USA


6
ACT Solutions Corp, Newark, DE 19713, USA


*
Author to whom correspondence should be addressed. 




Cosmetics 2018, 5(2), 34; https://doi.org/10.3390/cosmetics5020034


Received: 18 May 2018
/
Revised: 31 May 2018
/
Accepted: 2 June 2018
/
Published: 5 June 2018


(This article belongs to the Special Issue Green Ingredients in Cosmetics and Food)




Download


Download PDF

Download PDF with Cover

Download XML

Download Epub

Download Supplementary Material



Browse Figures













Versions Notes








Abstract:
The move toward green, sustainable, natural products has been growing in the cosmetic and personal care industry. Ingredients derived from marine organisms and algae are present in many cosmetic products. In this study, a new green ingredient, a wax (i.e., long-chain alkenones) derived from Isochyrsis sp., was evaluated as an alternative for cosmetic waxes. First, the melting point was determined (71.1–77.4 °C), then the alkenones’ thickening capability in five emollients was evaluated and compared to microcrystalline wax and ozokerite. Alkenones were compatible with three emollients and thickened the emollients similarly to the other waxes. Then, lipsticks and lip balms were formulated with and without alkenones. All products remained stable at room temperature for 10 weeks. Lipstick formulated with alkenones was the most resistant to high temperature. Finally, alkenones were compared to three cosmetic thickening waxes in creams. Viscosity, rheology, and stability of the creams were evaluated. All creams had a gel-like behavior. Both viscosity and storage modulus increased in the same order: cream with alkenones < cetyl alcohol < stearic acid < glyceryl monostearate. Overall, alkenones’ performance was comparable to the other three waxes. Alkenones can thus offer a potential green choice as a new cosmetic structuring agent.


Keywords: alkenones; Isochrysis sp.; lipstick; lip balm; emulsion; cosmetic; personal care; skin care















Graphical Abstract









 1. IntroductionThe personal care market has been continuously undergoing various trends in response to consumers’ demands. The move toward green, sustainable, natural products has been growing in recent decades [1]. Sustainability and naturalism have come to the forefront in the cosmetic and personal care industry [2]. While the overall market for cosmetics in the United States is experiencing a slower growth, in the range of 1–3%, the sector of cosmetics making environmental, natural or organic claims is projected to experience double-digit growth for the foreseeable future [1,3]. Green claims have become very popular in all marketing channels, from prestige to drug stores. Ingredients derived from plants, marine organisms, algae, yeasts, enzymes, and bacteria are present in many cosmetic products [4,5,6]. A select few strains of marine microalgae, including Isochrysis sp. (Chromista, Haptophyta), produce high-melting (~70 °C) lipids known as long-chain alkenones (Figure 1) [7]. In this study, we focused on Isochrysis as it is one of only a few algal species with a history of industrial cultivation, harvested as a primary component of shellfish feed [8]. Alkenones, therefore, represent a potentially abundant and renewable resource available from common algae, with a history of large-scale production [9]. Isochrysis species have been noted for their high lipid content [10], and potential application in cosmetic and personal care products [11,12,13]. The high-melting lipids, being naturally sourced (i.e., green and non-GMO) and sustainable, may be of interest to the cosmetic and personal care industry.Alkenones structures are characterized by very long hydrocarbon chains (i.e., 36–40 carbons), approximately twice as long as typical fatty acids as in Figure 1a. Alkenones contain trans double bonds and a methyl or ethyl ketone [14]. Alkenones are off-white waxy solids at room temperature (Figure 1b). Alkenones may serve as a viable alternative for commonly used waxes in cosmetic and personal care products. Waxes, such as candelilla wax, microcrystalline wax, and carnauba wax are widely used as structurants in lip products, such as lip balms and lipsticks, and as thickeners in skin creams. In the last two decades, there has been a shortage of candelilla wax on the market due to climatic factors. According to forecasts [15], candelilla wax supply and, therefore, the price will continue to fluctuate. As a result, there is a high demand for suitable alternatives in lipsticks and lip balms [16,17]. The alkenones may offer a more reliable supply source for formulators.Today, microalgae are considered sustainable natural sources for the production of a wide range of molecules with varying application fields. Lipids obtained from microalgae have received increasing interest during the last decade and have been widely studied for biodiesel production [18,19], potential pharmaceutical application [20,21], as animal food [22], and nutraceuticals [23]. However, the application of alkenones has not yet been explored in cosmetic and personal care products. In this study, alkenones sourced from commercially available Isochrysis biomass were evaluated for their potential application in lipsticks, lip balms and skin creams.  2. Materials and Methods 2.1. MaterialsThe marine microalgae Isochrysis was purchased from Necton S.A. (Olhão, Portugal). Alkenones were isolated and purified from the Isochrysis biomass as previously described [8]. Microcrystalline wax, ozokerite, castor oil, triglyceride, isoeicosane, meadowfoam seed oil, lanolin alcohol, candelilla wax, carnauba wax, Red 7, mica pearl white, tocopherol, petrolatum, jojoba oil, almond oil, avocado butter, and xanthan gum were purchased from Making Cosmetics (Snoqualmie, WA, USA). The following ingredients were received as gifts: hexamethyldisiloxane (Dow Corning, Midland, MI, USA); isohexadecane (Presperse, Somerset, NJ, USA); isopropyl stearate (Lubrizol, Wickliffe, OH, USA); C12-15 alkyl benzoate (Phoenix Chemical, Calhoun, GA, USA); ethylhexyl methoxycinnamate and Germaben II (INCI: Propylene glycol, diazolidinyl urea, methylparaben, and propylparaben; Ashland, Covington, KY, USA); propanediol (DuPont Tate & Lyle Bio Products, Loudon, TN, USA); sorbitan oleate, polysorbate 80, and cetyl alcohol (Croda, Edison, NJ, USA), stearic acid (Acme Hardesty, Blue Bell, PA, USA), and glyceryl monostearate (Corbion, Lenexa, KS, USA). All ingredients were of cosmetic grade. 2.2. Methods 2.2.1. Determination of SolubilityFormulating for EfficacyTM (ACT Solutions Corp, Kirkwood, DE, USA), hereinafter referred to as ‘FFE’, is an in silico modeling software used in the cosmetic and personal care and the pharmaceutical industry in formulation design. In this project, FFE was utilized to predict the solubility of alkenones based on Hansen Solubility Parameters (HSPs) in a variety of solvents. Solubility was necessary information for later steps of this study. In order to add ingredients to FFE, we created their simplified molecular-input line-entry system (SMILES), as this information was not available in the published literature or chemical databases (e.g., PubChem). ChemDraw (Release 15.0, CambridgeSoft, Waltham, MA, USA), a molecule editing software, was used to create the SMILES.  2.2.2. Melting Point DeterminationMelting point was determined using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) analysis. Using a Mettler MT 5 microbalance (Mettler Toledo, Columbus, OH, USA), a 6-mg sample was sealed in an aluminum crucible. A pinhole was created on the lid of the crucible to vent gas buildup. DSC was performed at a 10 °C/min ramp from 0–400 °C using a DSC 822e instrument (Mettler Toledo, Columbus, OH, USA) attached to a F25-ME refrigerated/heating circulator (Julabo, Allentown, PA, USA). Nitrogen gas was purged at a rate of 10 mL/min. TA Universal analysis software was used to obtain the scans. 2.2.3. Thickening Capability TestThis test was used to determine how alkenones thicken emollients commonly used in personal care and makeup product formulations. In order to select comparators for alkenones, a literature search was done on the melting point of various, commonly used waxes. The ones with melting points close to that of the alkenones were tested with the above-mentioned DSC method to confirm the melting range. Two waxes with similar melting ranges, microcrystalline wax and ozokerite, were identified as good comparators. The melting point peak was 69 °C for microcrystalline wax, and 74 °C for ozokerite.Solvents identified by FFE were used in this test. To evaluate the thickening of the waxes, 9.0 g of solvent was weighed on an analytical balance with an accuracy of 0.001 g into a 25-mL glass beaker. The solvent, while covered with aluminum foil to avoid evaporation, was heated approximately 5 °C above the melting point of the particular wax. When the solvent reached the desired temperature, it was removed from the heat, and 1.0 g of the wax was added to the solvent. Mixing continued until room temperature was reached. The mixture was then reweighed and the evaporated solvent was replaced. The beaker was left covered with a piece of aluminum foil overnight. The stability of the mixture was checked the following day, and if it remained stable, viscosity was measured. Stability was qualitatively assessed based on signs of separation and any visible change in color. A Brookfield viscometer DV-I (Brookfield Engineering Laboratories, Middleboro, MA, USA) was used with a concentric cylinder spindle (#21) and a small sample adapter to determine the viscosity of the different wax-solvent mixtures. The tests were performed at 21 °C. The spindle was rotated from 0–100 rpm. All measurements were done in triplicate. 2.2.4. Lipstick and Lip Balm FormulationBased on the melting-point determination, microcrystalline wax and ozokerite were selected to be used as comparators for the alkenones. A lipstick formula (Table 1) and a lip balm formula (Table 2) containing both microcrystalline wax and ozokerite were selected with the purpose that the alkenones would be tested as an alternative for either microcrystalline wax or ozokerite. This way, both the compatibility of the various waxes and the suitability of the alkenones in a lipstick/lip balm formula could be tested.For the lipstick, phase A was added to a glass beaker and heated to 80 °C to melt the waxes. The pigment dispersion in Phase B was prepared using an EXACT three-roll mill (EXACT Technologies, Inc, Oklahoma City, OK, USA). Ingredients of Phase B were added to melted phase A one-by-one and mixed until the color was uniform. Then the mixture was removed from heat. Phase C was added to phase A/B, and the mixture was poured into a metal lipstick mold while still hot. When settled, the sticks were topped off. The mold then was put into the refrigerator for 15 min. The lipsticks were then removed from the mold and inserted into plastic lipstick cases. For the lip balm, phase A was heated to 80 °C while mixing until all ingredients were melted. Then the mixture was removed from the heat and phase B was added with mixing until a homogenous mixture was obtained. The mixture was then poured into lip balm tubes. 2.2.5. Cream FormulationFour oil-in-water (O/W) emulsions were formulated. One contained the alkenones, while the other three were formulated with commonly used waxes as comparators for the alkenones. The comparator waxes were cetyl alcohol, stearic acid, and glyceryl monostearate. The waxes acted as thickeners in the oil phase. The composition of the creams can be found in Table 3.All four creams were formulated identically. First, water was heated to 80 °C. Xanthan gum was mixed with propanediol to form a slurry. This slurry was added to the water. The oil phase (i.e., phase B) was combined in a separate beaker and heated to 80 °C. When both phases reached the same temperature, the oil phase was added to the water phase with propeller mixing. The emulsion was briefly homogenized, then it was removed from the heat. The emulsion was allowed to cool with continuous propeller stirring, and phase C was added when the emulsion reached 45 °C. The emulsion was allowed to cool to room temperature under continuous mixing. Water loss was checked by weighing the creams and evaporated water was replaced. The emulsion was mixed again and was then homogenized for 10 s. Then, each cream was stored in plastic jars. 2.2.6. Viscosity, Thixotropy, and RheologyRheological properties and viscosity of the emulsions were evaluated using a Discovery hybrid rheometer DHR-3 (TA Instruments, New Castle, DE, USA). A 40 mm 2° cone and plate geometry at 25.0 ± 0.1 °C was used to test samples of ~0.8 mL. The shear rates ranged from 0.1–100 s−1 in steady state flow for viscosity and thixotropy measurements. Dynamic viscoelasticity was measured as a function of frequency in the linear viscoelastic region (LVE).First, the LVE range was determined with an amplitude sweep [24]. The amplitude sweep helps establish the extent of the material’s linearity. Below the critical stress level, the structure is intact, and G’ (storage modulus) and G” (loss modulus) remain constant. Increasing the stress above the critical stress level disrupts the network structure. Above the critical stress, the material’s behavior is non-linear and G’ usually declines. After the LVE was defined, a frequency sweep at an oscillation stress below the critical value was performed. The frequency sweep provides more information about the effect of colloidal forces, type of network structure in the cream and the interactions among droplets [24,25]. 2.2.7. Liquid Crystalline StructureOleosomes are liquid crystal regions that form around the oil drops in an emulsion [26]. These are multilayers of lamellar liquid crystals surrounding the oil droplets that become randomly distributed as they progress into the continuous phase. The rest of the liquid crystals produce the “gel” phase that is viscoelastic [27]. The creams were observed with a polarized light microscope (Accu-Scope® 3000 LED, Accu-Scope, Commack, NY, USA). For the microscopic evaluation, a small amount of each emulsion was placed on a microscopic slide and quickly covered with a cover slip. The sample was finger pressed to spread and create a cream layer as thin as possible. A 40× objective lens was used with cross polarizers in a bright field to detect birefringence. Detecting optical linear birefringence has been a standard tool in studying the anisotropic properties of materials for nearly two centuries [28]. Birefringence can be detected using a polarized light microscope. The sample is placed between two polarizers oriented with their planes of vibration being mutually perpendicular. When an isotropic sample is placed between crossed polars, the state of the polarization of light is unchanged and in theory, no light is transmitted through the optical system. The light can only be transmitted if the state of polarization is changed, i.e., the sample is birefringent [28]. Oleosomes appear under optical microscopy as “Maltese crosses” [29]. 2.2.8. Stability TestingStability of the lipsticks, lip balms and creams were monitored at two temperatures, room temperature (25 °C) and an elevated temperature (45 °C) in stability cabinets for 10 weeks. Samples were checked visually at weeks 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10. Lipsticks and lip balms were assessed in their final containers. Samples of creams were placed into 1.5-mL centrifuge tubes, and those tubes were placed into stability cabinets.  3. Results and Discussions 3.1. Determination of Solubility and Thickening Capability TestThe three individual alkenones and a mixture of them described by O’Neil et al. [9] were entered into FFE to generate HSPs based on the SMILES. Additionally, FFE was used to calculate the molar volume (MVol), Ingredient-Skin Gap value (ISG), Solubility in Skin (SolS), and LogK. The individual components and the overall alkenones blend had a high MVol (Table 4), which is expected considering the composition of the alkenones (ref. Figure 1). The Ingredient-Skin Gap (ISG) refers to the compatibility of the ingredient with the stratum corneum (i.e., the outer layer of the epidermis). The smaller the ISG is, the more compatible the ingredient is with the stratum corneum and the greater the likelihood the ingredient can penetrate the skin (the MVol also plays an essential role in determining skin penetration) [30]. All three individual alkenones and the mixture are on the higher end of the scale (certain ingredients have an ISG as low as 2). SolS refers to the solubility in the skin, which is estimated from the HSP distance. The alkenones have a low SolS value. A proper formulation strategy can be put together with either lower or higher SolS. LogK refers to the octanol/water partitioning coefficient of an ingredient. LogK is not used in further FFE calculations. The solubility of alkenones was predicted by FFE in the 53 solvents found in FFE. Solubility predictions were based on the HSPs. Out of solvents deemed “good” by FFE for alkenones, five were selected for the thickening capability test. These five solvents were: hexamethyldisiloxane, isohexadecane, isopropyl isostearate, C12-15 alkyl benzoate, and ethylhexyl methoxycinnamal. Figure S1 shows the Hansen Space of the alkenones, the five emollients, and the skin. All five emollients are located close to the alkenones in the Hansen Space indicating that they are good solvents for the alkenones. The main groups of emollients commonly used in personal care and makeup applications include silicones, hydrocarbons, and esters. We selected a silicone, a hydrocarbon, a light ester and a heavier ester in terms of skin feel. The fifth ingredient selected was a liquid sunscreen (ethylhexyl methoxycinnamal). We selected a sunscreen as a solvent because we wanted to explore the thickening capability of the alkenones in a liquid organic sunscreen.The alkenones were incompatible with the liquid silicone (hexamethyldisiloxane) and the hydrocarbon (isohexadecane), these solvent-wax mixtures separated into two layers overnight. The alkenones were compatible with the rest of the solvents, and no signs of separation were observed at room temperature within 24 h. Incompatibility may result from a more complex interaction between solvents and waxes. The selected solvents are very different in structure; therefore, it would be predicted that the different waxes interacted differently with the different solvents. We cannot expect to see a general pattern in solvent-wax compatibility due to the possible interactions. All mixtures had a shear thinning behavior. This is characteristic of microcrystalline wax and ozokerite; therefore, this type of behavior was expected from the alkenones as well. The majority of cosmetic and personal care products are shear thinning; therefore, a wax providing such a behavior is desireable. Viscosity data is shown in Figure 2. When analyzing the viscosity data, a single shear rate (s−1) was selected where we had a reliable reading for all three waxes, and the viscosity was compared at this shear rate in order to put viscosity into perspective.Again, with the possible interactions between the components, we cannot expect to see a clear pattern for the viscosity values. The alkenones thickened the three solvents in a similar fashion as the other two waxes, and viscosities were comparable. The fact that the alkenones remained stable with the liquid sunscreen, and also that it could thicken the liquid sunscreen effectively is very promising. It has been reported that having a thick and even layer of sunscreen on the skin is essential to provide the claimed SPF [31,32]. The viscosity data indicate that the alkenones were highly effective in thickening the liquid sunscreen (ethylhexyl methoxycinnamate). 3.2. Melting Point DeterminationThe melting point of the alkenones was within the range of 71.1–77.4 °C. The DSC thermogram exhibited a sharp characteristic endothermic melting peak at 73.8 °C. Examples of waxes commonly used in cosmetic and personal care products include beeswax, candelilla wax, carnauba wax, castor wax, lanolin alcohol, sunflower wax, ozokerite and microcrystalline wax. The melting point of these waxes ranged from 61–89 °C. The alkenones’ melting point range falls into this range, making them a viable candidate as a cosmetic wax. 3.3. Lipstick and Lip Balm StabilityThe surface of the lipsticks and lip balms formulated with the alkenones (i.e., Lipsticks 2 and 3, and Lip Balms 2 and 3) was more matte than that of the lipstick and lip balm made without the alkenones (i.e., Lipstick 1 and Lip Balm 1). The matte finish was probably the result of an interaction between the emollients and the wax. If a shiny finish is desired for a lipstick or lip balm, the emollients could be substituted with other types of emollients. In this study, we were not optimizing the formula to a shiny or matte finish; we chose a relatively simple starting formula that contained all the waxes of interest and formulated the products.The color was uniform for all lipsticks. The various waxes were compatible with one another. The alkenones were compatible with the rest of the ingredients as well, and no visible changes were observed during the course of the stability study. The lipsticks showed no signs of change at room temperature during the 10 weeks (Table S1). The first sign of instability was observed at Week 4 at an elevated temperature when Lipstick 1 and 2 had signs of sweating. Sweating is a quality problem when oil droplets appear on the surface of the stick. The cause of the problem may be an incompatibility between individual ingredients in the formulation, imbalanced composition such as high oil content, or inferior oil-blending capacity of the wax composition [33,34]. At Week 10, at high temperature, Lipsticks 1 and 2 were considered unstable as they had signs of severe sweating. Lipstick 3 showed no signs of sweating, even at Week 10 at elevated temperature, making it the most resistant formulation to high temperature. For the lip balms, the first signs of a slight change were observed at Week 2. Lip Balm 2 (i.e., made with microcrystalline wax and the alkenones) was softer than the other two balms at 25 °C and was extremely soft, especially at the center of the balm, at 45 °C. This softness was considered a sign of instability. A lip balm that cannot hold its shape at room temperature and higher temperature is unlikely to pass quality testing. When twisting the lip balm upwards, as one would do to apply the lip balm to the lips, the balm did not hold its shape; it was a semi-solid greasy mass. Lip balms are expected to have a certain hardness and resistance to higher temperature in case they are left at elevated temperature, e.g., in the car in the summertime. This behavior of Lip Balm 2 can be explained with the melting point of the waxes. The melting point peak is 68.8 °C for microcrystalline wax, 73.8 °C for the alkenones, and 74.2 °C for ozokerite (measured in-house with the above-described DSC method). The combination of the two lower melting point waxes resulted in a softer product. The difference between the melting point peak of ozokerite and alkenones may be viewed as not significant, as it is less than 1 °C, but the change in product hardness is noticeable. When looking at product hardness, not only the waxes but the interaction among all ingredients should be taken into account, as an interaction may modify product softness [35]. At elevated temperature, all lip balms were softer starting at Week 1. Higher temperature softens the consistency of the waxes and butters used in the lip balms, making the lip balms softer. These lip balms would probably regain their original hardness if taken out of the stability cabinet and allowed to cool to room temperature. Overall, the stability of the lipsticks and lip balms made with the alkenones was comparable to that of the lipstick and lip balm made without the alkenones. During formulation and stability testing, the sticks and balms were identical and had similar qualities. 3.4. Viscosity, Thixotropy and RheologyAll four creams were opaque/white. The viscosity of each sample is reported at two shear rates (s−1) in Table 5. The two selected shear rates were 1 and 100 s−1, they represent a low shear and a high shear application, respectively, i.e., when a cream is applied to the skin. The viscosity varied more than 10-fold. All four creams contained the same emulsifier system, a combination of polysorbate 80, a nonionic emulsifier with a high HLB value (HLB: 15.0), and sorbitan oleate, a nonionic emulsifier with a low HLB value (HLB: 4.3). As both emulsifiers were liquid ingredients, they did not thicken the emulsions. Differences in flow and viscosity between different creams were due to the different waxes and their ability to thicken the emulsions. All four creams were shear-thinning, as is expected for a cosmetic lotion/cream (Figure 3a). A Power Law model (Viscosity = k × shear raten) fits well for all four creams (using viscosity measurements with increasing shear rate, which is discussed below). Cream 1 had the lowest viscosity, Cream 2 and Cream 3 had very similar viscosities, and Cream 4 had the highest viscosity, which agrees with the k parameter of the Power Law model (Table 5). The shear thinning index, n, varied from 0.14–0.26, which is similar to other personal care products [36,37,38]. Certain creams were thixotropic as well. Thixotropic materials lose structure during shear, which may rebuild upon standing [39]. This behavior is a key factor in the ability of a cosmetic cream to be easily applied to a surface (through structure breakdown in spreading) and then rebuild its structure and viscosity, preventing it from dripping and running after application. To determine whether any of the samples were thixotropic, viscosity was plotted for increasing and decreasing shear rate (Figure 3b). Differences between the up and down curves indicates the extent of the thixotropy. Cream 1—made with the alkenones—was shear-thinning without being thixotropic. The area between the two curves increased in the following order: Cream 2 < Cream 3 < Cream 4. The largest difference in viscosity at 1 s−1 was measured for Cream 4 as 11,500 cP or 60% decrease. Thixotropy was related to the wax. The alkenones did not provide any thixotropic property to Cream 1; however, when combined with another wax, thixotropy could be built into the product, if desired.During the viscoelastic measurements, the sample is not rotated, but an oscillation shear flow is applied. Oscillatory flow may be considered a non-destructive test. G’ describes the elastic behavior of a sample, while G” represents the viscous portion. If G’ is above G”, samples show more elastic or gel-like behavior. In the case of all four creams, G’ > G”, indicating that the formulations were more elastic than viscous, i.e., the creams were gel-like. Cream 4 had the highest G’. Creams exhibiting G’ greater than G’’ may be more stable than formulations with G’’ values higher than G’ since they can recover their structure faster and more efficiently and are less susceptible to gravitational forces that can lead to phase separation of emulsions [40]. An almost constant value of G’ and G” was observed over the entire frequency range with the value of G’ exceeding that of G”. Frequency independence of G’ and G” indicates gel-like behavior for the creams. Overall, both viscosity and G’ increased in the same order: Cream 1 < Cream 2 < Cream 3 < Cream 4 (Table 5). 3.5. Liquid Crystalline StructureThe formation of the liquid crystal structure is the result of an ordered arrangement of the emulsifier, oil and wax molecules at the oil-water interface. The stability of cosmetic emulsions can be increased by forming liquid crystals in the continuous phase.Birefringence was detected in Creams 2–4. No birefringence was observed for Cream 1, suggesting that the alkenones did not produce any liquid crystal structure at the water-oil interface. Fatty acids such as cetyl alcohol and stearic acid are known to form liquid crystalline structures [41]. The alkenones most likely stayed in the oil phase, unlike the other waxes, which migrated to the water-oil interface.  3.6. Cream StabilityThe stability of the samples was evaluated for ten weeks or until any irreversible change was noticed. All samples remained stable at room temperature without any physical signs of instability for ten weeks. At the higher temperature, Cream 1 started to show signs of a reversible separation (creaming) very early in the stability test. Cream 2 started showing signs of creaming at Week 2. Creams 3 and 4 showed irreversible separation at the higher temperature at Week 2, and were therefore considered unstable. 4. ConclusionsTo evaluate how alkenones compared to commonly used waxes, this bio-derived wax was physically characterized and tested for cosmetic and a personal care applications.Our results indicate that the alkenones are promising ingredients for lip products. The melting point of the alkenones is similar to that of commonly used waxes for lip balms and lipsticks. Lipsticks and lip balms prepared with the alkenones remained stable at room temperature for 10 weeks, and at the elevated temperature, they showed similar signs of instability as the lipsticks made without the alkenones. Lip products formulated with the alkenones were more matte than the products formulated without the alkenones. The final product’s finish could be changed by selecting other emollients. Our goal was to evaluate whether a lipstick and lip balm could be successfully formulated with the alkenones. Product optimization was not pursued. We believe that the lip makeup application area should be further investigated more objectively than in the current, qualitative study. Performing stick hardness and breaking strength studies could confirm the great potential of the alkenones for this area with quantitative results.The alkenones had an acceptable performance in emulsions. They did not thicken the emulsions to the same extent as the comparator waxes (i.e., cetyl alcohol, stearic acid and glyceryl monostearate). In terms of viscoelastic behavior, Cream 1 made with the alkenones had a similar rheology as Creams 2–4 (made without the alkenones). A very important characteristic of a successful formulation is product stability. All creams were stable at room temperature for ten weeks, while at elevated temperature Cream 1 was more stable than Creams 3–4. As a future study, we suggest that the alkenones are studied in more detail for sunscreen applications. Waxes are commonly used in sunscreens to thicken products. The alkenones formed a stable mix with the liquid organic sunscreen and thickened the sunscreen quite well. In summary, our results suggest that the alkenones can be a great green choice as a structuring agent for lip products and also for creams, when combined with other waxes. 


 Supplementary MaterialsThe following are available online at https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9284/5/2/34/s1, Figure S1: Hansen Space for the alkenones (yellow), five solvents (orange), and skin (green). Table S1: Stability results of lipsticks and lip balms, Table S2: Stability results of creams. Author ContributionsConceptualization, M.C. and G.B.; Formal analysis, M.W.L., M.C. and G.B.; Funding acquisition, G.B.; Investigation, K.M., A.S., L.K.Y. and M.W.L.; Methodology, M.C. and G.B.; Project administration, G.B.; Resources, G.B.; Software, M.C. and G.B.; Supervision, A.K.T., C.M.R., G.W.O., M.W.L. and G.B.; Visualization, M.W.L. and G.B.; Writing—original draft, G.B.; Writing—review & editing, K.M., A.K.T., C.M.R., G.W.O., M.W.L., M.C. and G.B.FundingThis research was funded by the Washington Research Foundation and a private donor from friends of the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, grant number N-126478.AcknowledgmentsThe authors would like to thank the raw ingredient suppliers, including Dow Corning, Presperse, Lubrizol, Phoenix Chemical, Ashland, DuPont Tate & Lyle Bio Products, Croda, Acme Hardesty and Corbion, for donating the ingredients. The authors would also like to thank Charisse Montgomery (University of Toledo) for her editorial support.Conflicts of InterestThe authors declare no conflict of interest. The funding sponsors had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, and in the decision to publish the results.ReferencesO’Lenick, A.J., Jr. Naturals and Organics in Cosmetics: Trends and Technology; Allured Business Media: Carol Stream, IL, USA, 2010; pp. 1–5. ISBN 978-1-932633-71-9. [Google Scholar]Sahota, A. Sustainability: How the Cosmetic Industry is Greening Up; John Wiley and Sons: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2014. [Google Scholar]Organic Cosmetics Market Research. Available online: https://www.cosmeticsandtoiletries.com/networking/news/company/Organic-Cosmetics-Market-Research-372973201.html (accessed on 18 May 2018).Rao, S. Green and sustainable ingredients from biotransformation and biofermentation. In Harry’s Cosmetology, 9th ed.; Rosen, M.R., Ed.; Chemical Publishing Co., Inc.: Los Angeles, CA, USA, 2015; Volume 2, pp. 643–653. ISBN 978-0-8206-01779. [Google Scholar]Pande, A.; Majeed, M. Multi-functional botanicals for topical applications. In Harry’s Cosmetology; Rosen, M.R., Ed.; Chemical Publishing Co., Inc.: Los Angeles, CA, USA, 2015; Volume 2, pp. 655–695. ISBN 978-0-8206-01779. [Google Scholar]Offredo, H. Marine ingredients for skin care: An ocean of resources. In Harry’s Cosmetology; Rosen, M.R., Ed.; Chemical Publishing Co., Inc.: Los Angeles, CA, USA, 2015; Volume 2, pp. 891–907. ISBN 978-0-8206-01779. [Google Scholar]O’Neil, G.W.; Carmichael, C.A.; Goepfert, T.J.; Fulton, J.M.; Knothe, G.; Pui Ling Lau, C.; Lindell, S.R.; Mohammady, N.G.E.; Van Mooy, B.A.S.; Reddy, C.M. Beyond fatty acid methyl esters: Expanding the renewable carbon profile with alkenones from Isochrysis sp. Energy Fuels 2012, 26, 2434–2441. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]O’Neil, G.W.; Williams, J.R.; Wilson-Peltier, J.; Knothe, G.; Reddy, C.M. Experimental protocol for biodiesel production with isolation of alkenones as coproducts from commercial isochrysis algal biomass. J. Vis. Exp. 2016. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]O’Neil, G.W.; Williams, J.R.; Craig, A.M.; Nelson, R.K.; Gosselin, K.M.; Reddy, C.M. Accessing monomers, surfactants, and the queen bee substance by acrylate cross-metathesis of long-chain alkenones. J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc. 2017, 94, 831–840. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]García, J.L.; Vicente, M.D.; Galán, B. Microalgae, old sustainable food and fashion nutraceuticals. Microb. Biotechnol. 2017, 10, 1017–1024. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]Mata, T.M.; Martins, A.A.; Caetano, N.S. Microalgae for biodiesel production and other applications: A review. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2010, 14, 217–232. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Mourelle, L.M.; Gomez, C.P.; Legido, J.L. The potential use of marine microalgae and cyanobacteria in cosmetics and thalassotherapy. Cosmetics 2017, 4, 46. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Widowati, I.; Zainuri, M.; Kusumaningrum, H.P.; Susilowati, R.; Hardivillier, Y.; Leignel, V.; Bourgougnon, N.; Mouget, J.-L. Antioxidant activity of three microalgae Dunaliella salina, Tetraselmis chuii and Isochrysis galbana clone tahiti. IOP Conf. Ser. Earth Environ. Sci. 2017, 55, 1–6. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]O’Neil, G.W.; Culler, A.R.; Williams, J.R.; Burlow, N.P.; Gilbert, G.J.; Carmichael, C.A.; Nelson, R.K.; Swarthout, R.F.; Reddy, C.M. Production of jet fuel range hydrocarbons as a coproduct of algal biodiesel by butenolysis of long-chain alkenones. Energy Fuels 2015, 29, 922–930. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Candelilla Wax and Substitution Options. Available online: https://www.brenntag.com/media/documents/bsi/product_data_sheets/life_science/koster_kuenen_food_waxes/candelilla_wax_alternatives.pdf (accessed on 1 April 2018).Demand for Natural Wax Increases. Available online: https://www.icis.com/resources/news/2008/08/18/9149059/demand-for-natural-wax-increases/ (accessed on 1 Arpil 2018).Global Candelilla Wax Industry 2016 Market Research Report. Available online: http://www.marketresearchstore.com/report/global-candelilla-wax-industry-2016-market-research-report-63520 (accessed on 1 April 2018).Huerlimann, R.; de Nys, R.; Heimann, K. Growth, lipid content, productivity, and fatty acid composition of tropical microalgae for scale-up production. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2010, 107, 245–257. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]Silitonga, A.S.; Masjuki, H.H.; Ong, H.C.; Mahlia, T.M.I.; Kusumo, F. Optimization of extraction of lipid from Isochrysis galbana microalgae species for biodiesel synthesis. Energy Source Part A 2017, 39, 1167–1175. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Mimouni, V.; Ulmann, L.; Pasquet, V.; Mathieu, M.; Picot, L.; Bougaran, G.; Cadoret, J.P.; Morant-Manceau, A.; Schoefs, B. The potential of microalgae for the production of bioactive molecules of pharmaceutical interest. Curr. Pharm. Biotechnol. 2012, 13, 2733–2750. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]Durga, J.; Vishakha, J.; Brinda, S.; Anil, K.; Kumar, G.V. Microalgae-based pharmaceuticals and nutraceuticals: An emerging field with immense market potential. ChemBioEng Rev. 2017, 4, 257–272. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Volkman, J.K.; Jeffrey, S.W.; Nichols, P.D.; Rogers, G.I.; Garland, C.D. Fatty acid and lipid composition of 10 species of microalgae used in mariculture. J. Exp. Mar. Biol. Ecol. 1989, 128, 219–240. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Mimouni, V.; Ulmann, L.; Haimeur, A.; Guéno, F.; Meskini, N.; Tremblin, G. Marine microalgae used as food supplements and their implication in preventing cardiovascular diseases. OCL 2015, 22, D409. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Callens, C.; Ceulemans, J.; Ludwig, A.; Foreman, P.; Remon, J.P. Rheological study on mucoadhesivity of some nasal powder formulations. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 2003, 55, 323–328. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Madsen, F.; Eberth, K.; Smart, J.D. A rheological assessment of the nature of interactions between mucoadhesive polymers and a homogenised mucus gel. Biomaterials 1998, 19, 1083–1092. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Tadros, T.; Leonard, S.; Taelman, M.; Verboom, C.; Wortel, V. Correlating the structure and rheology of liquid crystalline phases in emulsions. Cosmet. Toilet. 2006, 121, 89–94. [Google Scholar]Tadros, T.T. Formulations: In Cosmetic and Personal Care; de Gruyter: Berlin, Germany, 2016. [Google Scholar]Pajdzik, L.A.; Glazer, A.M. Three-dimensional birefringence imaging with a microscope tilting-stage. I. Uniaxial crystals. J. Appl. Crystallogr. 2006, 39, 326–337. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Bioavailability. Available online: https://cosmetic-industry.com/en/bioavailability.html (accessed on 1 May 2018).Wichers, J.; Abbott, S. Formulating for EfficacyTM, Help and Manual. 1.3.07. Available online: https://www.jwsolutionssoftware.com/ (accessed on 5 June 2018).Liu, W.; Wang, X.; Lai, W.; Yan, T.; Wu, Y.; Wan, M.; Yi, J.; Matsui, M.S. Sunburn protection as a function of sunscreen application thickness differs between high and low spfs. Photodermatol. Photoimmunol. Photomed. 2012, 28, 120–126. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]Teramura, T.; Mizuno, M.; Asano, H.; Naito, N.; Arakane, K.; Miyachi, Y. Relationship between sun-protection factor and application thickness in high-performance sunscreen: Double application of sunscreen is recommended. Clin. Exp. Dermatol. 2012, 37, 904–908. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]Dweck, A.C.; Burnham, C.A. Moulding techniques in lipstick manufacture: A comparative evaluation. Int. J. Cosmet. Sci. 1980, 2, 143–173. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]El-Nokaly, M.; Vatter, M.L.; Walling, D.W.; Leatherbury, N.C.; Peterson, C.L. Non-Sweating Lipsticks. U.S. Patent, US5843407A, 18 October 1993. [Google Scholar]Fernandes, A.R.; Dario, M.F.; Pinto, C.A.S.d.O.; Kaneko, T.M.; Baby, A.R.; Velasco, M.V.R. Stability evaluation of organic lip balm. Braz. J. Pharm. Sci. 2013, 49, 293–299. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]Wei, K.; Thomas, C.; Taylor, R.; Tanner, P.; Stella, Q.; Smith, E.; Clapp, M. Multi-Phase Personal Care Composition. U.S. Patent, US20050100570A1, 1 November 2005. [Google Scholar]Rheology School. Available online: http://www.brookfield.co.uk/education/rheology_papers_benchmark_products.asp#top (accessed on 17 May 2018).Using the Power Law Model to Quantify Shear Thinning Behavior on a Rotational Rheometer. Available online: https://www.azom.com/article.aspx?ArticleID=11624 (accessed on 17 May 2018).Brummer, R. Rheology Essentials of Cosmetic and Food Emulsions; Springer: Berlin, Germany, 2006. [Google Scholar]Alam, M.M.; Aramaki, K. Glycerol effects on the formation and rheology of hexagonal phase and related gel emulsion. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2009, 336, 820–826. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]Mcgee, T.; Sgaramella, R.P.; Vedantam, V.K. Preparation of an Emulsion Comprising Lamellar Liquid Crystal (llc) Particles Containing Fragrance. Patent WO2008061384 A1, 29 May 2008. [Google Scholar]







Figure 1.
(a) Structures of a common alkenone, i.e., 37:2 methyl alkenone, produced by Isochyrsis sp., and a common fatty acid, i.e., 18:2 linoleic acid. Nomenclature for both is # of carbons:# of double bonds; however, note that the configuration and separation of double bonds are different. (b) Alkenones wax.




 Figure 1.
(a) Structures of a common alkenone, i.e., 37:2 methyl alkenone, produced by Isochyrsis sp., and a common fatty acid, i.e., 18:2 linoleic acid. Nomenclature for both is # of carbons:# of double bonds; however, note that the configuration and separation of double bonds are different. (b) Alkenones wax.









Figure 2.
Viscosity of wax-emollient mixtures 24 h after formulation (average ± SD). Viscosities are compared at 9.3 s−1 for emollients 1–4, and at 0.93 s−1 for emollient 5. MW: microcrystalline wax, O: ozokerite, A: alkenones.




 Figure 2.
Viscosity of wax-emollient mixtures 24 h after formulation (average ± SD). Viscosities are compared at 9.3 s−1 for emollients 1–4, and at 0.93 s−1 for emollient 5. MW: microcrystalline wax, O: ozokerite, A: alkenones.









Figure 3.
(a) Viscosity-shear rate data and power law model fitting for the four creams. (b) Viscosity-shear rate data showing the extent of thixotropy in the four creams.




 Figure 3.
(a) Viscosity-shear rate data and power law model fitting for the four creams. (b) Viscosity-shear rate data showing the extent of thixotropy in the four creams.









Table 1.
Lipstick formulas.



Table 1.
Lipstick formulas.

INCI NameLipstick 1% (w/w)Lipstick 2% (w/w)Lipstick 3% (w/w)Phase A   Castor oil25.825.825.8Triglyceride16.016.016.0Isoeicosane17.017.017.0Meadowfoam seed oil5.05.05.0Lanolin alcohol5.05.05.0Microcrystalline wax2.02.0-Ozokerite wax5.0-5.0Alkenone wax-5.02.0Candelilla wax7.07.07.0Carnauba wax3.03.03.0Phase B   Red 7 (and) castor oil2.02.02.0Mica pearl white11.011.011.0Phase C   Tocopherol0.20.20.2Propylene glycol (and) diazolidinyl urea (and) methylparaben (and) propylparaben1.01.01.0









Table 2.
Lip balm formulas.



Table 2.
Lip balm formulas.

INCI NameLip Balm 1% (w/w)Lip Balm 2% (w/w)Lip Balm 3% (w/w)Phase A   Petrolatum45.545.545.5Jojoba oil22.022.022.0Almond oil13.013.013.0Microcrystalline wax8.08.0-Ozokerite8.0-8.0Alkenones-8.08.0Avocado butter3.03.03.0Phase B   Tocopherol0.50.50.5









Table 3.
Cream formulas.



Table 3.
Cream formulas.

INCI NameCream 1% (w/w)Cream 2% (w/w)Cream 3% (w/w)Cream 4% (w/w)Phase A    Water68.868.868.868.8Propanediol5555Xanthan gum0.20.20.20.2Phase B    Isopropyl isostearate15151515Alkenones5---Cetyl alcohol-5--Stearic acid--5-Glyceryl monostearate---5Sorbitan oleate1.51.51.51.5Polysorbate 803.53.53.53.5Phase C    Propylene glycol (and) Diazolidinyl urea (and) Methyl paraben (and) Propyl paraben1111









Table 4.
Parameters calculated by Formulating for EfficacyTM.



Table 4.
Parameters calculated by Formulating for EfficacyTM.

IngredientδDδPδHMVolISGSolSLogK37:3 methyl alkenone16.30.62.561357.20.316.8137:2 methyl alkenone16.20.72.262158.80.315.8338:2 ethyl alkenone16.10.82.263860.10.316.27Mixture combined according to [9]16.20.72.362258.50.3-









Table 5.
Viscosity and storage modulus (average ± SD) of the creams at room temperature.



Table 5.
Viscosity and storage modulus (average ± SD) of the creams at room temperature.

SampleViscosity at 1 s−1 (cP)Viscosity at 100 s−1 (cP)G’ at 10 rad/s (Pa)Cream 11470 ± 1054 ± 111 ± 1Cream 26950 ± 110147 ± 145 ± 10Cream 38460 ± 570169 ± 11560 ± 1100Cream 419,400 ± 2500400 ± 104710 ± 4300


© 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).



Share and Cite
























MDPI and ACS Style

McIntosh, K.; Smith, A.; Young, L.K.; Leitch, M.A.; Tiwari, A.K.; Reddy, C.M.; O’Neil, G.W.; Liberatore, M.W.; Chandler, M.; Baki, G. Alkenones as a Promising Green Alternative for Waxes in Cosmetics and Personal Care Products. Cosmetics 2018, 5, 34.
https://doi.org/10.3390/cosmetics5020034


AMA Style

McIntosh K, Smith A, Young LK, Leitch MA, Tiwari AK, Reddy CM, O’Neil GW, Liberatore MW, Chandler M, Baki G. Alkenones as a Promising Green Alternative for Waxes in Cosmetics and Personal Care Products. Cosmetics. 2018; 5(2):34.
https://doi.org/10.3390/cosmetics5020034

Chicago/Turabian Style

McIntosh, Kyle, Amber Smith, Lisa K. Young, Michael A. Leitch, Amit K. Tiwari, Christopher M. Reddy, Gregory W. O’Neil, Matthew W. Liberatore, Mark Chandler, and Gabriella Baki. 2018. "Alkenones as a Promising Green Alternative for Waxes in Cosmetics and Personal Care Products" Cosmetics 5, no. 2: 34.
https://doi.org/10.3390/cosmetics5020034


Find Other Styles








Note that from the first issue of 2016, this journal uses article numbers instead of page numbers. See further details here.

Article Metrics


No

No




Article Access Statistics

For more information on the journal statistics, click here.

Multiple requests from the same IP address are counted as one view.









Supplementary Material





Supplementary File 1:


PDF-Document

(PDF, 217 KiB)








clear




Zoom
|
 Orient 
|
 As Lines 
|
 As Sticks 
|
 As Cartoon 
|
 As Surface 
|
Previous Scene
|
Next Scene










Cite


















Export citation file:
BibTeX |
EndNote |
RIS




MDPI and ACS Style

McIntosh, K.; Smith, A.; Young, L.K.; Leitch, M.A.; Tiwari, A.K.; Reddy, C.M.; O’Neil, G.W.; Liberatore, M.W.; Chandler, M.; Baki, G. Alkenones as a Promising Green Alternative for Waxes in Cosmetics and Personal Care Products. Cosmetics 2018, 5, 34.
https://doi.org/10.3390/cosmetics5020034


AMA Style

McIntosh K, Smith A, Young LK, Leitch MA, Tiwari AK, Reddy CM, O’Neil GW, Liberatore MW, Chandler M, Baki G. Alkenones as a Promising Green Alternative for Waxes in Cosmetics and Personal Care Products. Cosmetics. 2018; 5(2):34.
https://doi.org/10.3390/cosmetics5020034

Chicago/Turabian Style

McIntosh, Kyle, Amber Smith, Lisa K. Young, Michael A. Leitch, Amit K. Tiwari, Christopher M. Reddy, Gregory W. O’Neil, Matthew W. Liberatore, Mark Chandler, and Gabriella Baki. 2018. "Alkenones as a Promising Green Alternative for Waxes in Cosmetics and Personal Care Products" Cosmetics 5, no. 2: 34.
https://doi.org/10.3390/cosmetics5020034


Find Other Styles








Note that from the first issue of 2016, this journal uses article numbers instead of page numbers. See further details here.




clear










Cosmetics,
EISSN 2079-9284,
Published by MDPI



RSS


Content Alert






Further Information


Article Processing Charges


 Pay an Invoice


Open Access Policy


Contact MDPI


Jobs at MDPI




Guidelines


For Authors


For Reviewers


For Editors


For Librarians


For Publishers


For Societies


For Conference Organizers




MDPI Initiatives


Sciforum


MDPI Books


Preprints.org


Scilit


SciProfiles


Encyclopedia


JAMS


Proceedings Series




Follow MDPI


LinkedIn


Facebook


Twitter







Subscribe to receive issue release notifications and newsletters from MDPI journals


Acoustics
Actuators
Administrative Sciences
Adolescents
Advances in Respiratory Medicine
Aerospace
Agriculture
AgriEngineering
Agrochemicals
Agronomy
AI
Air
Algorithms
Allergies
Alloys
Analytica
Analytics
Anatomia
Anesthesia Research
Animals
Antibiotics
Antibodies
Antioxidants
Applied Biosciences
Applied Mechanics
Applied Microbiology
Applied Nano
Applied Sciences
Applied System Innovation
AppliedChem
AppliedMath
Aquaculture Journal
Architecture
Arthropoda
Arts
Astronomy
Atmosphere
Atoms
Audiology Research
Automation
Axioms
Bacteria
Batteries
Behavioral Sciences
Beverages
Big Data and Cognitive Computing
BioChem
Bioengineering
Biologics
Biology
Biology and Life Sciences Forum
Biomass
Biomechanics
BioMed
Biomedicines
BioMedInformatics
Biomimetics
Biomolecules
Biophysica
Biosensors
BioTech
Birds
Blockchains
Brain Sciences
Buildings
Businesses
C
Cancers
Cardiogenetics
Catalysts
Cells
Ceramics
Challenges
ChemEngineering
Chemistry
Chemistry Proceedings
Chemosensors
Children
Chips
CivilEng
Clean Technologies
Climate
Clinical and Translational Neuroscience
Clinics and Practice
Clocks & Sleep
Coasts
Coatings
Colloids and Interfaces
Colorants
Commodities
Complications
Compounds
Computation
Computer Sciences & Mathematics Forum
Computers
Condensed Matter
Conservation
Construction Materials
Corrosion and Materials Degradation
Cosmetics
COVID
Crops
Cryptography
Crystals
Current Issues in Molecular Biology
Current Oncology
Dairy
Data
Dentistry Journal
Dermato
Dermatopathology
Designs
Diabetology
Diagnostics
Dietetics
Digital
Disabilities
Diseases
Diversity
DNA
Drones
Drugs and Drug Candidates
Dynamics
Earth
Ecologies
Econometrics
Economies
Education Sciences
Electricity
Electrochem
Electronic Materials
Electronics
Encyclopedia
Endocrines
Energies
Eng
Engineering Proceedings
Entropy
Environmental Sciences Proceedings
Environments
Epidemiologia
Epigenomes
European Burn Journal
European Journal of Investigation in Health, Psychology and Education
Fermentation
Fibers
FinTech
Fire
Fishes
Fluids
Foods
Forecasting
Forensic Sciences
Forests
Fossils
Foundations
Fractal and Fractional
Fuels
Future
Future Internet
Future Pharmacology
Future Transportation
Galaxies
Games
Gases
Gastroenterology Insights
Gastrointestinal Disorders
Gastronomy
Gels
Genealogy
Genes
Geographies
GeoHazards
Geomatics
Geosciences
Geotechnics
Geriatrics
Gout, Urate, and Crystal Deposition Disease
Grasses
Hardware
Healthcare
Hearts
Hemato
Hematology Reports
Heritage
Histories
Horticulturae
Hospitals
Humanities
Humans
Hydrobiology
Hydrogen
Hydrology
Hygiene
Immuno
Infectious Disease Reports
Informatics
Information
Infrastructures
Inorganics
Insects
Instruments
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health
International Journal of Financial Studies
International Journal of Molecular Sciences
International Journal of Neonatal Screening
International Journal of Plant Biology
International Journal of Translational Medicine
International Journal of Turbomachinery, Propulsion and Power
International Medical Education
Inventions
IoT
ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information
J
Journal of Ageing and Longevity
Journal of Cardiovascular Development and Disease
Journal of Clinical & Translational Ophthalmology
Journal of Clinical Medicine
Journal of Composites Science
Journal of Cybersecurity and Privacy
Journal of Developmental Biology
Journal of Experimental and Theoretical Analyses
Journal of Functional Biomaterials
Journal of Functional Morphology and Kinesiology
Journal of Fungi
Journal of Imaging
Journal of Intelligence
Journal of Low Power Electronics and Applications
Journal of Manufacturing and Materials Processing
Journal of Marine Science and Engineering
Journal of Molecular Pathology
Journal of Nanotheranostics
Journal of Nuclear Engineering
Journal of Otorhinolaryngology, Hearing and Balance Medicine
Journal of Personalized Medicine
Journal of Respiration
Journal of Risk and Financial Management
Journal of Sensor and Actuator Networks
Journal of Theoretical and Applied Electronic Commerce Research
Journal of Vascular Diseases
Journal of Xenobiotics
Journal of Zoological and Botanical Gardens
Journalism and Media
Kidney and Dialysis
Kinases and Phosphatases
Knowledge
Land
Languages
Laws
Life
Liquids
Literature
Livers
Logics
Logistics
Lubricants
Lymphatics
Machine Learning and Knowledge Extraction
Machines
Macromol
Magnetism
Magnetochemistry
Marine Drugs
Materials
Materials Proceedings
Mathematical and Computational Applications
Mathematics
Medical Sciences
Medical Sciences Forum
Medicina
Medicines
Membranes
Merits
Metabolites
Metals
Meteorology
Methane
Methods and Protocols
Metrology
Micro
Microbiology Research
Micromachines
Microorganisms
Microplastics
Minerals
Mining
Modelling
Molbank
Molecules
Multimodal Technologies and Interaction
Muscles
Nanoenergy Advances
Nanomanufacturing
Nanomaterials
NDT
Network
Neuroglia
Neurology International
NeuroSci
Nitrogen
Non-Coding RNA
Nursing Reports
Nutraceuticals
Nutrients
Obesities
Oceans
Onco
Optics
Oral
Organics
Organoids
Osteology
Oxygen
Parasitologia
Particles
Pathogens
Pathophysiology
Pediatric Reports
Pharmaceuticals
Pharmaceutics
Pharmacoepidemiology
Pharmacy
Philosophies
Photochem
Photonics
Phycology
Physchem
Physical Sciences Forum
Physics
Physiologia
Plants
Plasma
Platforms
Pollutants
Polymers
Polysaccharides
Poultry
Powders
Proceedings
Processes
Prosthesis
Proteomes
Psych
Psychiatry International
Psychoactives
Publications
Quantum Beam Science
Quantum Reports
Quaternary
Radiation
Reactions
Receptors
Recycling
Religions
Remote Sensing
Reports
Reproductive Medicine
Resources
Rheumato
Risks
Robotics
Ruminants
Safety
Sci
Scientia Pharmaceutica
Sclerosis
Seeds
Sensors
Separations
Sexes
Signals
Sinusitis
Smart Cities
Social Sciences
Societies
Software
Soil Systems
Solar
Solids
Spectroscopy Journal
Sports
Standards
Stats
Stresses
Surfaces
Surgeries
Surgical Techniques Development
Sustainability
Sustainable Chemistry
Symmetry
SynBio
Systems
Targets
Taxonomy
Technologies
Telecom
Textiles
Thalassemia Reports
Thermo
Tomography
Tourism and Hospitality
Toxics
Toxins
Transplantology
Trauma Care
Trends in Higher Education
Tropical Medicine and Infectious Disease
Universe
Urban Science
Uro
Vaccines
Vehicles
Venereology
Veterinary Sciences
Vibration
Virtual Worlds
Viruses
Vision
Waste
Water
Wind
Women
World
World Electric Vehicle Journal
Youth
Zoonotic Diseases


Subscribe







© 1996-2023 MDPI (Basel, Switzerland) unless otherwise stated



Disclaimer


Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely
those of the individual author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or
the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to people or property resulting from any ideas,
methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.


Terms and Conditions


Privacy Policy







We use cookies on our website to ensure you get the best experience.
Read more about our cookies here.


Accept






Share Link

































Copy



clear





Share





https://www.mdpi.com/301312













































































































































































































































































































































clear


Back to TopTop






































