Document Name: role of Water ad in Eye Cream3
Document link: https://www.balanceme.com/gb/wonder-eye-cream-15ml/















Wonder Eye Cream 15ml





























































 


facebook



google



instagram



pinterest



rss



tumblr



twitter



youtube



arrow-left



arrow-right



cart



search



user



mail



print



star



star-half



menu



close-circle



close



linkedin



minus



plus



stumble-upon



heart



apple-pay



loop



cog



mastercard



americanexpress



paypal



visa



interac



discover



lock











Bank Holiday Treats: 3 for 2 on selected items. T&Cs apply.  
















































BEST-SELLERSShopSkincare


New In


Serums


Moisturisers


Cleansers


Boosters


Exfoliators


Eye Care


Lip Balm


Sunscreen


Face Masks


Face Mists


Face Oils


Tan Drops


Skincare Tools


All Skincare

Skin Concern


Blemishes + Breakouts


Pro-Ageing


Redness + Sensitivity


Dehydration


Dryness


Oily + Enlarged Pores


Uneven Skin Tone


Dullness


Cellulite

Body Care


Hand Care


Sleep


De-Stress


Body Oils


All Body Care

By Collection


Menopause


Teen Years


Pregnancy


Stressed Skin


Vegan


Fragrance Free


Gifts


Travel + Minis

OFFERSOffers


Current Offers


Skincare Duos


Kits + Bundles


Last Chance


Gift Vouchers


Subscribe + Save


Loyalty Program

Book a ConsultationAbout UsBehind the brand


Our Story


Our Ingredients


Our Blog

Sustainability


B Corp Certified

Community


Loyalty Program


Join Our Beauty Panel


Subscribe + Save




















Submit



close





















0 POINTS








BOOK A CONSULTATION











Your shopping cart is currently empty.











Home


Shop


Skincare


Eye Care


Wonder Eye Cream 15ml














                  CALM + REPLENISH
                




    Wonder Eye Cream 15ml
  

A lightweight eye cream to soothe, brighten and target dark circles




















        (101)
      



















































































                  CALM + REPLENISH
                




            Wonder Eye Cream 15ml
        

A lightweight eye cream to soothe, brighten and target dark circles




















                (101)
            
















              $32.00
            










Quantity

























                        Add to Bag
                  





























      Create Wishlist
  









*











            Make wishlist public
          
































Earn 32 Loyalty Points














Free shipping on orders over £40.Shipping information
FREE 48 Hour Tracked Delivery
  on all UK orders over £40
48 Hour Tracked Delivery – Royal Mail - £2.99
Next Day Tracked Delivery - DPD - £3.99
(UK postcodes only)
Click here for full shipping information






      Current Stock:
    




Our award winning cooling gel quenches, firms and soothes with aloe and hyaluronic acid, while also brightening dark shadows. Keep in the fridge for extra de puffing power.


Firms, Soothes + Reduces Dark Circles


A lightweight eye cream to soothe, brighten and target dark circles

More information






 



Brighten tired eyes with our multi-award winning three-in-one cooling eye gel. We’ve used a super fine low molecular weight Hyaluronic Acid to hydrate the delicate skin, lock in moisture and plump fine lines from within. The powerful combination of Cucumber, Aloe Vera, and Chamomile cools, hydrates and relieves puffiness on contact while Witch Hazel is brilliant at reducing dark circles and tightening the skin.
RESULTS:
Firms, soothes and brightens the delicate eye area.  Deeply hydrates and helps to reduce the appearance of dark circles and puffiness.
SKIN CONCERN:
For all skin types, particularly for dark circles and those showing first signs of ageing.



Use fingertips to tap onto cleansed skin, under and around the delicate eye area, until absorbed.

Use AM and PM after cleansing and before moisturiser.

Keep in the fridge for extra depuffing power.

Use within 6 months once opened.



Hyaluronic AcidThis super hydrator is best known for its unique ability to hold 1000x its weight in water making it the ultimate complexion champion being responsible for hydration, smoothness, suppleness and glow.
Witch HazelSuper refreshing, this cooling liquid is known for its ability to reduce swelling and bruising.
Cucumber OilUsed for years to soothe the delicate eye area, cucumber oil is rich in linoleic acid, Vitamin E, and other nutrients to sooth, nourish and calm.
Full Ingredients List
Aqua (Water), Glycerin (Vegetable), Hamamelis Virginiana (Witch Hazel) Water, Cetearyl Alcohol, Glyceryl Stearate, Cocos Nucifera (Coconut) Oil, Cetearyl Glucoside, Cucumis Sativus (Cucumber) Seed Oil, Hydroxystearic/Linolenic/Oleic Polyglycerides, Oleic/Linoleic/Linolenic Polyglycerides, Simmondsia Chinensis (Jojoba) Seed Oil, Hydrolyzed Hyaluronic Acid, Rubus Chamaemorus (Cloudberry) Seed Extract, Picea Abies (Spruce Knot) Extract, Rosa Canina (Rosehip) Fruit Oil, Anthemis Nobilis (Roman Chamomile) Flower Oil, Styrax Tonkinensis (Benzoin) Resin Extract, Pelargonium Graveolens (Rose Geranium) Flower Oil, Lavandula Angustifolia (Lavender) Flower Oil, Cymbopogon Martini (Palmarosa) Oil, Citrus Limon (Lemon) Peel Oil, Daucus Carota (Carrot) Seed Oil, Vitis Vinifera (Grape) Seed Oil, Tocopherol (Vitamin E), Aloe Barbadensis (Aloe Vera) Leaf Extract, Rosmarinus Officinalis (Rosemary) Extract, Helianthus Annuus (Sunflower) Seed Oil, Xanthan Gum, Sodium Stearoyl Lactylate, Coco Caprylate, Sodium Citrate, Dehydroacetic Acid, Benzyl Alcohol, Limonene, Linalool, Geraniol, Citral, Benzyl Benzoate, Citronellol.



Remove the cap and pump. Rinse out any excess product. The glass bottle and cap are widely recycled. Pump is not currently recyclable. The card box should also be recycled.

Please check with your local recycling facilities for further information on their recycling schemes.

Small Steps = Giant Leaps.












                    100%
            natural
        



cruelty free



made in britain



vegan








Leave a Review


                How many stars?
          

            Your Rating:
          






product.reviews.stars_count






product.reviews.stars_count






product.reviews.stars_count






product.reviews.stars_count






product.reviews.stars_count







      Name
      *









      Email Address
      *









      Review title
      *









      Review
      *


























Where To Use In Your Routine









"It's so effective,
it's become our best seller"





- Clare, Balance Me Co-Founder























Who Is It For?Everyone! For all skin types - particularly for dark circles and those showing the first signs of ageing. 


How much should I use?You only need a pea sized drop on your cleansed face. It can be applied morning and night, before your moisturiser.


Active IngredientsHyaluronic Acid - Responsible for hydration, smoothness, suppleness and glow.
Witch Hazel - Tightens skin, reduces inflammation and puffiness.
Cucumber Oil - Rich in linoleic acid, Vitamin C to sooth, nourish and calm delicate skin.READ MORE ABOUT OUR INGREDIENTS





TOP TIPKeep your Wonder Eye Cream in the fridge for extra depuffing powe.


The best bit


100% Natural



















How To Apply Our Eye Cream







Our co-founder Clare is a massive fan of our triple action eye cream. She applies it both morning and evening to help target fine lines, dark circles and puffiness.
















GREAT SKIN STARTS WITH CLEAN SKINThis cleanser just launched and it's already a cult.GET YOURS NOW









You may also like




















                    PLUMP + HYDRATE
            


                    Hyaluronic Plumping Primer 30ml
                































              $26.60
            




Add to Bag




















                    PLUMP + HYDRATE
            


                    Collagen Boost Moisturiser 50ml
                































              $42.00
            




Add to Bag




















                    GLOW + REPAIR
            


                    Vitamin C Repair Serum 30ml
                































              $50.00
            




Add to Bag




































Reviews




















5 based on 101 reviews.
          
            Leave a Review.
          





Lightweight but effective

      Written by Julie Adcock on 17th Apr 2023
    




















I love the lightness of this eye cream and yet it still provides great hydration to reduce fine lines.



Wonderful eye cream

      Written by Careen  on 12th Mar 2023
    




















This eye cream does the job. It’s nice and hydrating under the eye and feels cooling. Again with balanceMe products this soaks into skin with none of that yucky residue you get sometimes with other eye creams. It has helped brighten under my eyes up. Also, a little goes a long way as you get quite a fair amount with one pump. 



Amazing 

      Written by Emma  on 11th Mar 2023
    




















I love this product, I’m now on my second bottle. I recently went away and left it at home and I’ve really noticed the difference when I’ve not used it. My under eyes feel so hydrated and you can definitely see less visible wrinkles 



Definitely a wonder cream

      Written by Katie  on 10th Mar 2023
    




















I have always had really dark circles and now with a toddler they are worse than ever! I purchased this as I love the other items I was recommended so thought I’d give it a go. With this cream  you can see an almost instant result! Within 5 mins of applying there is a visible difference, for the better! ??



Wonder Eye Cream

      Written by Gillian Marshall-Lee on 27th Feb 2023
    




















Having watched your film on how to use the WEC,  I have used it morning and evening since it’s arrival with great expectations!
Perhaps I was expecting too much,  but I can honestly say I cannot see any difference in the appearance of dark circles or the little patches of dry skin.
Perhaps I have not been using it for long enough.
Or perhaps I am expecting miracles!
At least I have not had an allergic reaction!
I will keep on going…………



light and frsh

      Written by Kelly Weeden on 27th Feb 2023
    




















Love the wonder eye serum, it's light snd fresh feeling on the. Skin and absorbs really well



A superb product!

      Written by Simone Fields on 1st Dec 2022
    




















So glad I’ve tried this eye cream. Lovely and hydrating around the eye and leaves the skin looking firm. It absorbs super fast. Yet another hugely indulgent and pampering product, the best thing is all the natural ingredients.



Hydrating

      Written by Shona Matson on 26th Oct 2022
    




















Lovely lightweight texture but certainly is hydrating and feels really soothing for the contour of my delicate eye area. Not overly fragranced which I like and is easily absorbed.



Wow

      Written by Julie Harwood  on 18th Oct 2022
    




















This cream is amazing. Due to chronic illness my body is doing all sorts of weird things. One being a red, stinging rash around my eyes when I'm stressed. I was desperate to find something to help. My sister gave me her Wonder Eye and it worked. I use this every day now and any outbreaks have been minor.



Wonder Eye Cream

      Written by Sian Williams on 23rd Sep 2022
    




















I've been using this for a month. I'm not sure I notice a difference yet, but it feels great on my skin, particularly in the morning, straight out of the fridge.

I have very sensitive skin, and rosacea, so I'm always wary of trying new products, but this has been great, no reaction at all.







Next

































Currency

US Dollar




            British Pounds
          

            US Dollar
          

            Euro
          












 
 

INFORMATION

Contact Us
Skincare Consultations
Delivery
Returns
FAQs
Gift Vouchers
Subscribe and Save
Loyalty Club
Refer A Friend
Stockists
Careers
Affiliates


 















© 2020 Balance Me Limited. All Rights Reserved. Terms and Conditions, Privacy Policy and Cookie Policy.

































+44(0)2075931070 customercare@balanceme.com
























