Document Name: role of Preserving agent in Make up Cream2
Document link: https://extension.psu.edu/lets-preserve-ingredients-used-in-home-food-preservation
  






Let's Preserve: Ingredients Used in Home Food Preservation
















       

 The store will not work correctly in the case when cookies are disabled. JavaScript seems to be disabled in your browser.  For the best experience on our site, be sure to turn on Javascript in your browser.     Skip to Content  Menu Browse by Category Close  Animals and Livestock Animals and LivestockClose    View All   Dairy  DairyClose   View All   Product Quality   Nutrition and Feeding   Health and Care   Reproduction and Genetics   Manure and Nutrient Management   Facilities and Technology   Personal Safety    Business Management    Poultry  PoultryClose   View All   Production and Management   Product Quality   Nutrition and Feeding   Health and Care   Reproduction and Genetics   Manure and Nutrient Management   Facilities and Technology   Personal Safety    Business Management    Beef Cattle  Beef CattleClose   View All   Production and Management   Product Quality   Nutrition and Feeding   Health and Care   Reproduction and Genetics   Manure and Nutrient Management   Facilities and Technology   Personal Safety    Business Management    Equine  EquineClose   View All   Pasture and Environment Management   Nutrition and Feeding   Health and Care   Reproduction and Genetics   Manure and Nutrient Management   Facilities and Technology   Personal Safety    Business Management    Swine  SwineClose   View All   Production and Management   Product Quality   Nutrition and Feeding   Health and Care   Reproduction and Genetics   Manure and Nutrient Management   Facilities and Technology   Personal Safety    Business Management    Goats  GoatsClose   View All   Production and Management   Product Quality   Nutrition and Feeding   Health and Care   Reproduction and Genetics   Manure and Nutrient Management   Facilities and Technology   Personal Safety    Business Management    Sheep  SheepClose   View All   Production and Management   Product Quality   Nutrition and Feeding   Health and Care   Reproduction and Genetics   Manure and Nutrient Management   Facilities and Technology   Personal Safety   Business Management    Llamas and Alpacas  Llamas and AlpacasClose   View All   Nutrition and Feeding   Health and Care   Manure and Nutrient Management   Facilities and Technology   Business Management     Forage and Food Crops  Forage and Food Crops Close    View All   Agronomic Crops  Agronomic CropsClose   View All   Production and Harvesting   Species and Varieties   Soil Fertility and Management    Pests and Diseases   Weed Management   Organic Production   Sustainable Agriculture   Personal Safety   Business Management    Cover Crops  Cover CropsClose   View All   Production and Harvesting   Species and Varieties   Soil Fertility and Management    Pests and Diseases   Weed Management   Organic Production   Sustainable Agriculture   Personal Safety   Business Management    Forages  ForagesClose   View All   Production and Harvesting   Species and Varieties   Soil Fertility and Management    Forage Quality and Testing   Pests and Diseases   Weed Management   Organic Production   Sustainable Agriculture   Personal Safety   Business Management    Fruit  FruitClose   View All   Production and Harvesting   Cultivars and Rootstocks   Soil Fertility and Management    Pests and Diseases   Weed Management   Organic Production   Sustainable Agriculture   Personal Safety   Business Management    Vegetables  VegetablesClose   View All   Production and Harvesting   Species and Varieties   Soil Fertility and Management    Pests and Diseases   Weed Management   Organic Production   Sustainable Agriculture   Personal Safety   Business Management    Mushrooms  MushroomsClose   View All   Production and Harvesting   Substrate Management   Pests and Diseases   Food Safety   Business Management     Trees, Lawns, and Landscaping Trees, Lawns, and LandscapingClose    View All   Trees and Shrubs  Trees and ShrubsClose   View All   Production   Species and Varieties   Soil Management   Pests and Diseases   Weed Management   Personal Safety   Business Management    Turfgrass and Lawn Care  Turfgrass and Lawn CareClose   View All   Species and Cultivars   Establishment and Renovation   Fertility and Soil Management    Cultural Practices   Pests and Diseases   Weed Identification and Management   Athletic Fields and Sports Turf   Golf Course Turf   Personal Safety   Business Management    Ornamentals and Floriculture  Ornamentals and FloricultureClose   View All   Production   Species and Varieties   Soil Management   Pests and Diseases   Weed Management   Facilities and Technology   Business Management    Aquatic Plants and Algae  Aquatic Plants and AlgaeClose   View All   Species and Varieties   Pests and Diseases   Facilities and Technology   Business Management    Home Gardening  Home GardeningClose   View All   Planting and Growing   Species and Varieties   Soil Management   Pests and Diseases   Weed Management   Eco-Friendly Gardening   Pollination and Bees   Landscaping for Wildlife   Animal Control    Christmas Trees  Christmas TreesClose   View All   Production and Harvesting   Pests and Diseases   Business Management     Insects, Pests, and Diseases Insects, Pests, and DiseasesClose    View All   Pest, Disease and Weed Identification  Pest, Disease and Weed IdentificationClose   View All   Insect Identification and Control   Weed Identification and Control   Plant Disease Identification and Control    Pesticide Applicators  Pesticide ApplicatorsClose   View All   Certification and Study Materials   Recertification   Resources and Best Practices    Pest Management and Education  Pest Management and EducationClose   View All   Agriculture   Public/Homeowners   Educators and Teachers    Pollinators  PollinatorsClose   View All   Beekeeping   Habitat and Landscape   Identification and Biology   Pesticides   Pollination Services    Vectors  VectorsClose   View All   Tick Identification and Management   Mosquito Identification and Management   Vector-Borne Diseases     Forests and Wildlife Forests and WildlifeClose    View All   Forest Management  Forest ManagementClose   View All   Management Practices   Invasive and Competing Plants   Pests and Diseases   Legacy Planning    Forestry Business and Economics  Forestry Business and EconomicsClose   View All   Agroforestry   County Forest Economic Data   Policy and Ordinances   Timber Market Report    Forest Products  Forest ProductsClose   View All   Biofuels   Botanicals   Maple Syrup   Wood Products    Urban Forestry  Urban ForestryClose   View All   Community Forest Management   Tree Care   Tree Selection and Planting   Municipal Stormwater Management    Wildlife  WildlifeClose   View All   Habitat Management   Wildlife Ecology and Conservation   Wildlife Nuisance and Damage     Food Safety and Quality Food Safety and QualityClose    View All   Commercial Food Processing  Commercial Food ProcessingClose   View All   Good Manufacturing Practices   Regulations   Business Management    Dairy Food Processing  Dairy Food ProcessingClose   View All   Business Management   Production and Processing   Regulations   Safety and Sanitation    Farm Food Safety  Farm Food SafetyClose   View All   Good Agricultural Practices   Regulations    Food Service and Retail  Food Service and RetailClose   View All   Food Service Safety   Regulations   Business Management    Home Food Safety  Home Food SafetyClose   View All   Food Preservation   Food Safety    Grape and Wine Production  Grape and Wine ProductionClose   View All   Grape Production   Wine Production   Business Management and Marketing    Beer, Hard Cider, and Distilled Spirits  Beer, Hard Cider, and Distilled SpiritsClose   View All   Production   Business Management     Water WaterClose    View All   Drinking and Residential Water  Drinking and Residential WaterClose   View All   Water Quality    Supply and Conservation   Maintenance and Treatment   Testing and Interpretation    Pond Management  Pond ManagementClose   View All   Water Quality   Pond Maintenance   Aquatic Plants and Algae   Fisheries, Wildlife, and Ecology    Urban and Residential Stormwater  Urban and Residential StormwaterClose   View All   Water Quality   Flood Control   Design, Construction, and Maintenance    Wastewater Management  Wastewater ManagementClose   View All   Private Septic Systems   Industrial    Water for Agriculture  Water for AgricultureClose   View All   Conservation Practices   Irrigation Water   Livestock Drinking Water   Nutrient Management    Watershed Protection and Restoration  Watershed Protection and RestorationClose   View All   Streams and Rivers   Water Quality and Management   Watershed Education    Conservation Practices and Training  Conservation Practices and TrainingClose   View All   Ag Literacy   Conservation Practices   Administration and Funding     Energy  Energy Close    View All   Marcellus Shale and Natural Gas  Marcellus Shale and Natural GasClose   View All   Landowner Leasing and Royalties   Economic and Business Impacts   Environmental Impacts   Municipality and Government Impacts    Renewable and Alternative Energy  Renewable and Alternative EnergyClose   View All   Biofuels   Energy Use and Efficiency   Renewable Energy Resources     Business and Operations Business and OperationsClose    View All   Starting a Farm  Starting a FarmClose   View All   Exploring Farming   Starting a Business   Introduction to Agronomy   Introduction to Horticulture   Introduction to Livestock    Business Management  Business ManagementClose   View All   Business Growth   Financial   Marketing and Sales   Risk Management and Insurance   Transition and Succession Planning    Human Resources  Human ResourcesClose   View All   Labor Relations   Professional Development   Volunteer Management   Workforce Development    Land and Equipment  Land and EquipmentClose   View All   Acquisition and Leasing   Emerging Technology   Maintenance    Farm Markets  Farm MarketsClose   View All   Getting Started   Management   Marketing    Farm Safety  Farm SafetyClose   View All   Animal Handling   Farm Emergency Training   Farm Equipment and Structures   Protective Gear   Youth Safety   Disaster Preparedness   AgrAbility     Community Development Community DevelopmentClose    View All   Community Planning and Engagement  Community Planning and EngagementClose   View All   Broadband   Community Development   Leadership   Local Government   Volunteer Management    Economic Development  Economic DevelopmentClose   View All   See All Economic Development    Land Use  Land UseClose   View All   See All Land Use     Youth, Family, and Health Youth, Family, and HealthClose    View All   Nutrition, Diet, and Health  Nutrition, Diet, and HealthClose   View All   Nutrition and Food   Chronic Disease   Food Allergies   Fitness and Exercise   Mental Health    Children and Families  Children and FamiliesClose   View All   Child Care   Alcohol and Drug Prevention   Family Resiliency   4-H Youth Development     Browse All by Education Format Browse All by Education FormatClose  Articles ArticlesClose  Conferences ConferencesClose  Guides and Publications Guides and PublicationsClose  News NewsClose  Online Courses Online CoursesClose  Tools and Apps Tools and AppsClose  Videos VideosClose  Webinars WebinarsClose  Workshops WorkshopsClose  SearchSearch Search Account  Cart        Home   Let's Preserve: Ingredients Used in Home Food Preservation         Articles  Let's Preserve: Ingredients Used in Home Food Preservation  Learn about the typical ingredients used in home food preservation recipes, such as water, salt, sugars, thickening agents, and alternatives. Download Save for later   Print  Purchase     Guides and Publications Pages4 Ships in1 - 2 Business days Language English Let's Preserve: Ingredients Used in Home Food PreservationLearn about the typical ingredients used in home food preservation recipes, such as water, salt, sugars, thickening agents, and alternatives.  $0.75     Qty  Add to Cart     Updated: September 3, 2019    Skip to the end of the images gallery    Canning salt or pickling salt is pure salt, no additives. This type of salt is the best choice for canning, pickling, and sauerkraut. Photo credit: Mike Houtz, Penn State    Skip to the beginning of the images gallery    The quality and safety of home-preserved foods is dependent, in large part, on the ingredients that are used. Selecting the highest quality fruits and vegetables at their peak of freshness is the first step. Those that show signs of decay or are heavily bruised should be avoided. It is important to follow preservation recipes using the ingredients as written. Do not make changes to ingredient amounts or ratios that affect acidity and texture, as these factors play an important role in the safety of the process. Minor changes can be made only where the recipe allows. This guide provides information on many of the typical ingredients used in home food preservation recipes.
Water
Water accounts for over 90 percent of most foods. When water is a recipe ingredient, its composition can determine the quality of the final product. For safety reasons, use only water that you know is safe to drink. The quality of canned foods can be affected by the amount of minerals in water. If hard water is used, high levels of calcium or magnesium can lead to the formation of white precipitate that clouds the brine and eventually settles to the bottom of the jar. This phenomenon is especially true for low-acid foods, such as canned green beans. Other minerals, such as iron, can darken light-colored foods or add an unpleasant flavor. If minerals in hard water are a problem, consider using filtered bottled water or passing water through one of the commercially available water treatment units that attach to the faucet.
Salt and Salt Substitutes
Generally, salt is added to foods to enhance their flavor. Salt can be omitted for canning tomatoes, vegetables, meats, poultry, and seafood since the amount added does not contribute to the safety of the food. However, in fermented sauerkraut and brined pickles, salt not only provides a characteristic flavor but also is vital to safety since it favors the growth of desirable bacteria while inhibiting the growth of others. Therefore, do not attempt to make sauerkraut or fermented pickles by cutting back on the salt required.
Table salt is safe to use for canning. However, it usually contains anticaking additives that may make the brine cloudy or produce sediment at the bottom of the jar. Iodized salt is not recommended for fermenting pickles and sauerkraut, or for canning, because it may cause them to darken, discolor, or be spotty. It will also cause unusual colors to form in some vegetables. For example, cauliflower will sometimes turn pink or purple.
Canning salt or pickling salt is pure salt, no additives. This type of salt is the best choice for canning, pickling, and sauerkraut.
Kosher salt is a coarse, flaked, pure salt that also can be used in canning. Since flaked salt may vary in density, it is not recommended for making pickled and fermented foods, especially when salt concentration is a critical factor for microbial growth.
Sea salt is evaporated sea water and contains various minerals. It is safe to eat, but minerals in the salt may cause canned foods to discolor or affect the flavor.
Rock salt, ice cream salt, and solar salt are used to melt ice, freeze homemade ice cream, and soften water. Since they are not considered suitable for human consumption, do not use them for home food preservation.
Salt substitutes contain chemicals that provide a salty flavor but little or no sodium. Most salt substitutes contain potassium chloride. Some people think the potassium chloride has a metallic taste. One brand adds L-lysine to mask the metallic flavor. Do not substitute potassium chloride for sodium chloride in fermentation recipes. One way to lower the sodium content of sauerkraut or pickles is to rinse the product with water just before heating and serving, but never do this before canning. Lowering the salt content of fermented products before canning will lower the acid content (raise the pH) and possibly render the product unsafe to eat or quick to spoil.
Sugars and Nonnutritive Sweeteners
Sugars and Nonnutritive Sweeteners Understanding the flavor and heat stability properties of different sweeteners is important when deciding which to use for a specific application. For best results, we recommend following canning and freezing recipes in the Let's Preserve series or those from the National Center for Home Food Preservation. These recipes have been pretested to make sure that you get good results consistently.
Table sugar (sucrose) is the typical white granulated product we use to sweeten foods. Brown sugar is refined white sugar with molasses mixed in, and although the flavor differs somewhat, it has about the same sweetness value as white sugar when considered on a volume basis. Powdered sugar is finely ground sucrose combined with a small amount of cornstarch to prevent caking. This starch makes it unsuitable for canning because it may cause the brine to become cloudy. In addition to its sweetening effect, sugar serves as a preserving agent and aids in the gelling of jams and jellies.
Corn syrup is manufactured from corn starch by heating under acidic conditions. After a concentration step, the final product is a viscous mixture consisting mostly of glucose and polysaccharide chains of varying lengths. There are various corn syrups available on the market; the sugar content may vary depending on how long the process is allowed to proceed. Therefore, it is difficult to convert a volume of sugar into an equivalent amount of corn syrup at the same sweetness level. We recommend using a pretested food preservation recipe that specifically indicates how much liquid corn syrup to use.
High-fructose corn syrup (HFCS) is corn syrup that has been modified enzymatically to convert glucose molecules into fructose. The sweetening ability of the HFCS can be manipulated by adjusting the amount of fructose to between 42 and 90 percent of the product. HFCS is used most often as an ingredient in commercially manufactured foods and typically not found on grocery store shelves. If you were to find and use HFCS, consider using a lower volume than in recipes calling for corn syrup.
Honey is a natural product in which the primary sugar is fructose. It is safe to use as sweetener for canning or freezing. However, the flavor of the honey-sweetened foods may be noticeably different than expected. You may wish to make small quantities first to determine if you like them.
 
Maple syrup is made from the sap of sugar maple trees. The extracted liquid is concentrated by boiling to reach a standard sugar content of 66 percent. Pure maple syrup has a strong smoky flavor that some find too intense. Therefore, maple syrup products found in the grocery store usually contain added corn syrup sweeteners to moderate the flavor and reduce costs. As recommended previously, experiment with small batches to determine if the characteristic maple syrup flavor is compatible with your product.
Agave syrup, also known as agave nectar, is produced from the fibrous core of the agave plant. The juice within the core is extracted by a hot water process and then further treated with a combination of enzymes and high temperature conditions to break down flavorless inulin starch into soluble sugars. The treated extract is then concentrated into a syrup by boiling or a vacuum evaporation process. Because most of the sugar contained in agave syrup is fructose, its sweetening properties are similar to those of high-fructose corn syrup. Agave syrup has a unique flavor and some experimentation may be required when adapting recipes that originally call for sugar or corn syrup.
Sucralose is a chemically modified form of sucrose with no nutritive value (0 calories); the bulking agents added do contribute some energy value and the product contains about 12 percent of the calories of an equal volume of table sugar. Splenda® is a commercially formulated mixture of sucralose, starch, and dextrose sugar. Unlike other nonnutritive sugar substitutes, Splenda® is heat stable, so it can be used in canned foods. Some people do notice an aftertaste that may increase with storage time. Although Splenda® will provide sweetness, it will not provide the firmness to canned fruits that sugar does. Products canned with Splenda® will therefore be similar in texture to those canned in water. The Splenda® website (splenda.com) has recipes for preparing shelf-stable jams and jellies.
Stevia is stable to heat and could be used for canning fruit and other products in which sugar is not critical to food safety or texture. Rebaudioside A, the active ingredient in stevia, is 300 times sweeter than sugar. It has been listed as "generally recognized as safe" by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and therefore is exempt from food additive regulations. Truvía® is a stevia-based sugar substitute currently available on the market. According to their website (truvia.com), the product can be used for baking, cooking, and jam making. Splenda also has a stevia-based sweetener called Splenda Naturals. We have no reliable information on its potential use in canning and/or freezing. Green stevia leaves or leaf powders are available, but their sweetening effects might not be consistent.
Aspartame  is not recommended as a sweetening ingredient in canned foods because it rapidly breaks down into flavorless products during heating and storage. However, it can be added to sugarless processed fruits to sweeten them just prior to eating. Aspartame also can be used successfully in frozen fruit recipes.
Saccharin is a more heat-stable synthetic sweetener that can be used for jellies and jams, although some users have noticed a bitter taste after processing. Saccharin is also suitable for freezing.
Acidulants
Acids naturally present in or added to foods are an important part of the preservation process. Never change the amount of acid, dilute the acid with water, or substitute acid sources unless the recipe specifically allows you to do so.
Vinegar is obtained naturally by sequential fermentation of sugar to alcohol and then to acetic acid. Cider vinegar is derived from apple juice, while white vinegar is made from pure grain alcohol. For home food preservation purposes, use vinegars that are labeled as 5 percent acidity (50 grain) and that are pasteurized since they produce consistent results. White vinegar is usually preferred when light color is desirable, as is the case with fruits and cauliflower. Do not use homemade vinegar or vinegar of unknown acidity in pickling. It is important to follow the proper proportion/ratio of vinegar, water, and vegetables given in the recipe. Do not dilute the vinegar unless the recipe says to do so since you will be diluting the preservative effect. If a less sour product is preferred, add sugar rather than decrease the vinegar. Overfilling jars with vegetables or underfilling them with acid brine will lower the total acidity of the product and may adversely affect the safety of the product.
 
Lemon juice is another natural acidulant commonly used in home food preservation. To ensure safe acidity in whole, crushed, or juiced tomatoes, add 2 tablespoons of lemon juice per quart of tomatoes or 1 tablespoon per pint. Fresh-squeezed lemon juice can contain varying amounts of acid. To ensure consistently safe results, use bottled lemon juice purchased at the supermarket. An alternative to lemon juice for acidifying tomatoes is citric acid.
Citric acid is usually sold as a white crystalline powder. It can be used safely to acidify foods if used correctly. To acidify the canned tomatoes described above, citric acid may be used instead of lemon juice. Add ½ teaspoon per quart or ¼ teaspoon per pint. Citric acid also is used to preserve the color of fresh cut fruit or as a pretreatment for frozen and dried fruit (see Color Enhancers and Colorants section).
Aspirin, also known as acetylsalicylic acid, should never be used to acidify foods. Some people have a bad reaction to aspirin and its acidification properties vary depending on its strength.
Color Enhancers and Colorants
Citric acid is used to preserve the color of fresh cut fruit or as a pretreatment for frozen and dried fruit. It can be used either alone or mixed with other substances, such as ascorbic acid, erythorbic acid, N-acetylcysteine, glutathione, and EDTA. Most people find it more convenient to use commercially prepared antioxidant formulations such as Fresh Fruit Preserver, which contain a mixture of citric and ascorbic acids as active ingredients.
Ascorbic acid, also known as vitamin C, is used as an antioxidant to keep fruit from darkening. Pure crystals may be obtained at supermarkets and drug stores. Soak fruit immediately after cutting for 10 minutes in a solution prepared with 1 teaspoon of pure ascorbic acid dissolved in 1 gallon of cold water. Crushed vitamin C tablets also can be used. Six 500-milligram tablets equal 1 teaspoon of ascorbic acid. Erythorbic acid, also known as isoascorbic acid, is chemically identical to ascorbic acid but has no vitamin C activity because it is structurally different. It does have similar antioxidant properties and can be used the same way ascorbic acid is used to retain color.
Sulfites are sulfur-containing compounds that have been used for centuries to prevent discoloration and reduce spoilage during the preparation, dehydration, storage, and distribution of many foods. However, in recent years, sulfites have been implicated as initiators of asthmatic reactions in some people. As a result, the FDA has banned the use of sulfites on fresh fruits and vegetables for sale or served raw to consumers. They are still used as an antimicrobial agent and to help preserve the color of some dried fruit products. However, because of the health considerations involved, we recommend against the use of sulfites to preserve foods.
Food colors are available in both synthetic and natural forms. Although not necessary if good quality ingredients are used, there are several food-grade food dyes available that are safe to use. For example, artificial red food coloring is an optional ingredient for canned cherry pie filling. Make sure any colorants you use are approved by the FDA for use in foods and use them according to label directions. Avoid certain colorants that some people have reported being sensitive to, such as yellow #5 or carmine red. Some highly colored fruits or vegetables can act as a natural color sources—for example, beet juice, which is used to impart a red color to refrigerated pickled eggs, or turmeric powder, which is used in pickle recipes to add a yellow color.
Texture Enhancers and Thickening Agents
Pickling lime (calcium hydroxide) is a safe product that, if used correctly, can be used to improve the texture of pickles. But it is not necessary if good quality ingredients are used. Food-grade lime is used as a lime-water solution for soaking fresh cucumbers 12 to 24 hours before pickling. Excess lime absorbed by the cucumbers must be removed to make safe pickles. After soaking, drain the lime-water solution, rinse, and then resoak the cucumbers in fresh water for 1 hour. Repeat the rinsing and soaking steps two more times before processing.
Calcium chloride is commercially available in food-grade products as Pickle Crisp® from Ball and Xtra Crunch® from Mrs. Wages.  It provides the calcium necessary to help firm pectin but does not have the hydroxide component of pickling lime that can lower the acidity of pickled foods. Follow the manufacturer's directions. Do not use calcium chloride products that are not specifically labeled as food grade since they may contain other chemicals that are not safe to eat.
Alum, sold as a pickling ingredient, may be used safely to make fermented cucumbers crispier. But it is unnecessary if good-quality cucumbers are used and tested recipes are followed. Alum does not improve the firmness of quick-process pickles.
Starches are a common group of thickeners used in many food products. Since the viscosity (thickness) of food during canning affects the amount of heat that penetrates into jars during processing, use only the exact type and amount of starch specified in the recipe. Do not modify recipes for soups by adding starch thickeners since this may result in underprocessing.

ClearJel® is recommended in the USDA Complete Guide to Home Canning for canning pie fillings because it remains thin during processing to allow heat to penetrate into the jar and then thickens upon cooling. It also does not break down at high temperatures, which would result in a runny consistency of the final product. However, ClearJel® is not recommended for frozen sauces since it tends to weep during thawing.
Instant ClearJel® thickens without cooking and thus is not suitable for canned pie fillings. However, because it is freeze/thaw stable, it is a good option for preparing a pie filling just before pouring on top of a crust and then freezing.
Thermflo® is an acceptable alternative for canning since it is also stable during heating and exhibits about the same viscosity as ClearJel® during heating. Thermflo® has the added advantage of holding up well during freeze/thawing.
Tapioca is another option for thickening fresh and frozen pie fillings. The small tapioca granules do not dissolve completely when cooked, so pies thickened with tapioca appear to contain tiny gelatin-like balls. Instant tapioca or tapioca starch eliminates this effect because the starch is finely ground. Tapioca starch thickens at a lower temperature and stays stable when frozen. To use in a pie filling when mixed with the other ingredients, let it sit for 5 minutes to soak up some of the liquid. Tapioca is not recommended for canning pie fillings or other canned foods.

Pectins  are naturally occurring thickening agents extracted from the cell walls of certain fruits. When the correct proportion of pectin, acid, sugar, and water is heated and then allowed to cool, a thickened gel forms. Apples, crab apples, gooseberries, and some plums and grapes usually contain enough natural pectin to form a gel. Other fruits, such as strawberries, cherries, and blueberries, contain little pectin and must be combined with other fruits high in pectin or commercial pectin extracts. Modified pectins are specifically manufactured to make low-sugar, no-sugar, and freezer jams and jellies. To obtain the best results, follow the instructions provided exactly as provided by the manufacturer.
Gelatin is an animal protein that forms a gel under refrigerated conditions. Gelatin is not heat stable and therefore not appropriate for canned foods. However, it may be used to thicken refrigerated low-sugar jams and jelly recipes.
Miscellaneous Ingredients
Oils are pressed from several types of plants including corn, sunflower, safflower, canola, olives, walnuts, and hazelnuts. A few teaspoons of aromatic oils may be added to canning recipes with no effect on the safety of the process. However, adding more than the recommended amount to an already approved recipe may be hazardous since penetration of heat into the product may be affected.
Spices and herbs are aromatic dried leaves or other plant parts used to flavor food. Because of their intense flavor, dried spices and herbs are used in small amounts that do not affect the safety of recipes. Premixed spice mixes are available for specific products, such as salsa or pickled vegetables, and safe to use if package instructions are followed. Because the drying process concentrates flavors in dried herbs, you will need about three times the amount of fresh herbs when substituting for dry. A few sprigs of fresh herbs can also be added to canning recipes with no effect on the safety of the process. However, if a fresh herb is the main ingredient of the product, such as for basil pesto, it must be processed as a low-acid food. We do not have any tested recipes for canning pesto sauces and we encourage people to freeze this product instead.
Water glass, chemically known as sodium silicate, has long been used to preserve eggs. We cannot recommend the use of water glass since the safety of products preserved using this ingredient has not been evaluated scientifically.
Prepared by Luke LaBorde, professor of food science; Martha Zepp, extension project assistant; and Andy Hirneisen, senior food safety educator.  Agenda  Authors       Luke LaBorde, Ph.D.Professor of Food Science Expertise  Tracking Listeria monocytogenes in produce production, packing, and processing environments Food safety validation of mushroom growing, packing, and processing procedures Farm food safety, Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) training Hazards Analysis and Risk Based Preventive Controls (HACCP) training Technical assistance to home and commercial food processors Food Safety Modernization Act (FSMA)  More By Luke LaBorde, Ph.D.      Martha ZeppProgram Assistant, Part-time Expertise  Food Preservation  More By Martha Zepp      Andy Hirneisen, MASenior Extension Educator and Team Leader, Food Safety & Quality Expertise  Food Safety Food Quality Environmental Monitoring Home Food Preservation Digital Education   More By Andy Hirneisen, MA  You may also be interested in ...         Articles Let's Preserve: Soup   $0.75           Articles Preserving Sweet Corn Successfully        Articles Signs of Food Spoilage        Articles Advice about Vinegar        Videos Pectin's Role in Making Jam and Jelly        Articles Caution: Canning with Fats and Oils        Articles Ensuring a Good Seal on Canned Goods        Articles Preserving Your Horseradish Harvest        Articles Let's Preserve: Drying Fruits and Vegetables (Dehydration)   $0.50           Articles Respuestas Básicas acerca de los Cortes de Poda en Árboles Frutales     







Personalize
                your experience with Penn State Extension and stay informed of
                the latest in agriculture. NewsletterSign Up for Our Newsletter: Subscribe
  College of Agricultural Sciences
The Pennsylvania State University
323 Agricultural Administration Building
University Park, PA 16802Penn State Extension on FacebookPenn State Extension on LinkedInPenn State Extension on TwitterPenn State Extension on YouTubeInstagram
 About
                            Extension
                        AboutLeadershipCareersExtension NewsPressCounty Offices
                            Customer Service
                        Help CenterLogin ProblemsManage Email PreferencesContact UsOther
                            Programs
                        Pennsylvania 4-HBetter Kid CareMaster Gardeners
 Youth SafetyPrivacy and Legal StatementsVeterinary Advice StatementAccessibility Email address is required to loginPlease enter your email address below to create account.Email Sign In   




































































