Document Name: role of Methylparaben in Protective Cream4
Document link: https://www.webmd.com/beauty/what-to-know-about-methylparaben




Methylparaben: Where to Find It, Its Effects, and More



















































 Healthy Beauty  Healthy Beauty  Home  News  Reference  Slideshows  Quizzes  Videos  Related Topics  Fitness & Exercise  Hair Loss  Healthy Aging  Skin Problems & Treatments  Psoriasis  Women's Health  More Related Topics  Coronavirus Update  Check Your Symptoms  Find A Doctor  Find A Dentist Health  A-Z Health A-Z  Health A-Z  Common Conditions   ADD/ADHD  Allergies  Arthritis  Cancer  Coronavirus (COVID-19)  Depression  Diabetes  Eye Health  Heart Disease  Lung Disease  Orthopedics  Pain Management  Sexual Conditions  Skin Problems  Sleep Disorders  View All  Resources   Symptom Checker  WebMD Blogs  Podcasts  Newsletters  WebMD Magazine  Best Hospitals  Find a Doctor  Surgeries and Procedures A-Z Featured Topics Slideshow  Signs You Have Already Had COVID  Slideshow  Get Help for Migraine Relief Drugs &  Supplements Drugs & Supplements  Drugs & Supplements  Find & Review   Drugs  Supplements  Drug Basics & Safety   Commonly Abused Drugs  Taking Meds When Pregnant  Tools   Manage Your Medications  Pill Identifier  Check for Interactions  Drug Comparison Tool Featured Topics Slideshow  Vitamins You Need as You Age  Coronavirus  COVID-19 Vaccines Living  Healthy Living Healthy  Living Healthy  Diet, Food & Fitness   Diet & Weight Management  Weight Loss & Obesity  Food & Recipes  Fitness & Exercise  Beauty & Balance   Healthy Beauty  Health & Balance  Sex & Relationships  Oral Care  Living Well   Women's Health  Men's Health  Aging Well  Healthy Sleep  Healthy Teens Featured Topics Article  Smart Grocery Shopping When You Have Diabetes  Quiz  Do You Know the Benefits of Walking? Family &  Pregnancy Family & Pregnancy  Family & Pregnancy  All About Pregnancy   Getting Pregnant  First Trimester  Second Trimester  Third Trimester  View All  Parenting Guide   Newborn & Baby  Children's Health  Children's Vaccines  View All  Pet Care Essentials   Healthy Cats  Healthy Dogs  View All Featured Topics Slideshow  Smart Snacks When You're Pregnant  Slideshow  Surprising Things You Didn't Know About Dogs and Cats News &  Experts News & Experts  News & Experts  Health News   Simple Test Could Assess Risk of Dementia  You May Not Need 10,000 Steps a Day  Long COVID Treatment Isn't ‘One-Size-Fits-All’  ‘Stuck’ Stem Cells May Be to Blame for Gray Hair  Sleep Apnea May Cause Cognitive Problems  Experts & Community   Support Groups  Blogs  Webinars  News Center  New Book: Take Control of Your Heart Disease Risk Featured Topics WebMD Editorial Special  MINOCA: The Heart Attack You Didn’t See Coming  Get Our Newsletters  Health News and Information, Delivered to Your Inbox  Mobile Apps  Subscriptions  Menu  Healthy Beauty  Home  News  Reference  Slideshows  Quizzes  Videos  Related Topics  Fitness & Exercise  Hair Loss  Healthy Aging  Skin Problems & Treatments  Psoriasis  Women's Health  More Related Topics Healthy BeautyReference Menu  What to Know About Methylparaben  Written by  WebMD Editorial Contributors  Reviewed by  Dan  Brennan, MD   on October 25, 2021  In this Article  Benefits of Parabens  About Methylparaben  Methylparaben and Your Health  Paraben Allergies  Avoiding Parabens Cosmetic preservatives known as parabens have been under close scrutiny for years because of a possible link to breast cancer. This link isn’t strongly supported, but some people still have a fear of parabens.Methylparaben is one of the most common parabens. You can find it as part of a paraben mix in most cosmetic products, where it prevents germ growth. It can also be found naturally in some fruits and may be used as a food preservative or an antifungal preservative.Benefits of ParabensParabens mixed in cosmetics serve an important purpose: They prevent harmful mold, bacteria, and fungi from infecting your products. This helps protect you from infections. You might find them in things like:MakeupMoisturizers and lotionsHair-care productsShaving creams and gelsParabens as preservatives. Preservatives are vital to cosmetics. The water, vitamins, and nutrients in our cosmetic products nourish our skin but also provide the perfect environment for microorganisms to grow.Every time you use your cosmetic products, you introduce new bacteria to the container and product. Preservatives work hard to prevent the bacteria from growing, protecting you from infection or irritation and to prolonging the product's shelf life. This doesn't mean that products without preservatives aren't safe. You may need to take extra precautions when using and storing your cosmetic products. Generally, cosmetics without preservatives are similar to fresh fruit and vegetables in terms of shelf life.‌Most cosmetic products have multiple parabens. The four most common parabens in paraben mixes are:MethylparabenEthylparabenPropylparabenButylparabenYour skin absorbs parabens in cosmetics, medications, foods, or drinks. But your body will soon get rid of (or excrete) them.‌Preservatives like parabens in cosmetics don’t carry any special regulations. They are treated like all other ingredients and must be accurately labeled on the product. Cosmetic products and their ingredients don’t need approval from the FDA before hitting the shelves, so read the labels carefully if you want to know more about what you’re using.About MethylparabenMethylparaben works alongside other parabens to make your cosmetic products safer and improve their shelf life. If methylparaben is released into the air or exposed to sunlight for too long, it gets broken down.Methylparaben also doesn’t appear to stay inside the body for long. In studies on dogs, infants, and adult males, methylparaben was fully excreted in 48 hours or less. This serves as some evidence that methylparaben doesn’t have long-lasting effects.Methylparaben and Your HealthA study from 2004 found that breast cancer tumor samples had small amounts of parabens. This finding launched a new wave of scrutiny.Research has not ruled out that parabens are carcinogenic, or capable of causing cancer, but there is also a lack of evidence that they do cause cancer. In fact, there isn’t definitive proof that parabens affect human health at all.The hormone estrogen plays a role in breast cancer. Even if parabens act like estrogen for the purposes of breast cancer development, it’s a small role compared with the amount of estrogen produced by the ovaries.In a variety of animal studies, methylparaben was dangerous only when it was ingested in high quantities. This resulted in weight loss, stomach damage, and congestion.Methylparaben was not toxic in moderate to high doses. Animal studies showed no signs of:Pregnancy loss or birth defectsDamage to sperm, testicles, or uterusTumorsThe amount of methylparaben used in animal studies is far more than what you encounter in your day-to-day life. In studies on the effects of methylparaben on humans, most of the negative outcomes were due to allergic reactions.Paraben AllergiesA paraben allergy typically causes dermatitis. Symptoms include:HivesItchinessRashFlaking or peeling skinSwellingYour doctor can diagnose a paraben allergy based on your medical history and a patch test. If you believe you may have a sensitivity to your cosmetics, stop using them and ask your doctor about a patch test for allergens. Your doctor can help isolate the cause of your sensitivity.Avoiding ParabensIf you prefer to be cautious about methylparaben, look at the ingredients list on all of the products you use.Companies are required to label their products accurately. Products without parabens will be labeled accordingly. Otherwise, look for any ingredients ending with “-paraben”.Methylparaben may also be labeled as:Methyl 4-hydroxybenzoateMethyl parabenMethyl p-hydroxybenzoateNipagin Show Sources SOURCES:‌Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: “Parabens Factsheet.”FDA: “Allergens in Cosmetics,” “Parabens in Cosmetics.”Harvard Health Publishing: “By the way, doctor: Are parabens dangerous?”MADESAFE: “#ChemicalCallout: Parabens.”Michigan State University: "Preservatives - Keeping our cosmetics safe & fresh."NIH National Library of Medicine: “Methylparaben.” © 2021 WebMD, LLC. All rights reserved.  View privacy policy and trust info Top PicksToday on Radiance Beauty Oils: Benefits of Coconut, Argan, and More  The benefits of coconut, argan, tea tree and more.  Sun Safety: Tips to Help Save Your Skin From Damage  Tips to help save your skin from damage.  Reduce Wrinkles: 9 Secrets to Smoother Skin  9 secrets of smoother skin. Recommended for You Slideshow  Age-Defying Makeup Tricks  Video  Foot Care Made Simple  Slideshow  Are You Making These Beauty Mistakes? Tools & Resources Do You Need a Special Eye Cream?  The Benefits of Botox  Guide to a Perfect Pedi  How Safe is Hair Dye?  When Fashion Hurts  Beauty Time-Savers 
Get Skin Care Tips In Your InboxSkin care and wellness tips to help you look and feel your best. Sign up for the Good Health newsletter. Healthy Beauty SubscribeBy clicking Subscribe, I agree to the WebMD Terms & Conditions & Privacy Policy and understand that I may opt out of WebMD subscriptions at any time.Health Solutions from Our Sponsors Penis Curved When Erect?  Could I have CAD?  Treat Bent Fingers  Treat HR+, HER2- MBC  Tired of Dandruff?  Benefits of CBD  Rethink MS Treatment  AFib-Related Strokes  Risk of a Future DVT/PE  Is My Penis Normal?  Relapsing MS Options  Liver Transplants Save Lives  Finance Plastic Surgery  Bent Finger Causes  Living With Psoriasis?  Missing Teeth? More from WebMD 5 Tips to Help With Relapsing MS  How to Thrive With Narcolepsy  Relief for Blocked Hair Follicles  Psoriatic Arthritis and Your Sleep  What Psoriasis Feels Like  First Psoriatic Arthritis Flare  Talking to Your Doctor About RA  Crohn's: A 'Full-Body' Disease  Avoiding Crohn’s Flares  Health Benefits of Hemp Seed Oil  Live Better With Psoriatic Disease  Types of B-Cell Therapy for MS  5 Health Benefits of Hemp  Why Prostate Cancer Spreads  Living with Advanced Breast Cancer  Where Breast Cancer Spreads Related Links Beauty Home  Beauty News  Beauty References  Beauty Slideshows  Beauty Videos  Fitness & Exercise  Hair Loss  Healthy Aging  Skin Problems  Psoriasis  Women's Health  More Related Topics  Find us on:  Facebook  Twitter  Pinterest  Policies  Privacy Policy  Cookie Policy  Editorial Policy  Advertising Policy  Correction Policy  Terms of Use  About  Contact Us  About WebMD  Careers  Newsletter  Corporate  WebMD Health Services  Site Map  Accessibility  Our Apps  WebMD Mobile  WebMD App  Pregnancy  Baby  Allergy  For Advertisers  Advertise with Us  Advertising Policy © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, an Internet Brands company. All rights reserved.WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information. 









