Document Name: role of Water up to in Care Cream2
Document link: https://www.mayoclinichealthsystem.org/hometown-health/speaking-of-health/water-essential-to-your-body





Water: Essential for your body - Mayo Clinic Health System














































Skip to main content









Patient Portal 

Pay Bill Online 

Request an Appointment 

 

 






 





 Services
 

 Providers
 

Locations 


Minnesota

Adams
Albert Lea
Austin
Belle Plaine
Blooming Prairie
Butterfield
Caledonia
Cannon Falls
Fairmont
Faribault




Janesville
Kenyon
Lake City
Le Sueur
Mankato
Montgomery
New Prague
New Richland
Northfield
Owatonna




Plainview
Red Wing
Sherburn
St. James
St. Peter
Waseca
Waterville
Wells
Zumbrota



Wisconsin

Arcadia
Barron
Bloomer
Chetek
Chippewa Falls
Eau Claire
Ellsworth
Glenwood City
Holmen
La Crosse




Menomonie
Mondovi
Onalaska
Osseo
Prairie du Chien
Rice Lake
Sparta
Tomah



Iowa

Decorah
Lake Mills




 View map 




 Classes/Events
 

 Blog
 

 Wellness
 

 Referrals
 

 COVID-19
 












 








Posted By






                            Allyn Wergin, R.D.N.
                        


                        Diabetes Education, Nutrition
                    



Recent Posts








Speaking of Health
The power of blueberries
July 22, 2022









Speaking of Health
An introduction to probiotics
July 13, 2022









Speaking of Health
Is sea salt healthier than table salt?
April 21, 2022





Featured Topics

Behavioral Health
Cancer
Children's Health (Pediatrics)
COVID-19
COVID-19 Vaccine
Exercise and Fitness
Heart Health
Men's Health
Neurosurgery
Obstetrics and Gynecology
Orthopedic Health
Weight Loss and Bariatric Surgery
Women's Health



 




Speaking of Health
Thursday, September 29, 2022

Water: Essential for your body










































Topics in this Post

Nutrition
Get healthy recipes and tips






Drinking water does more than just quench your thirst. It's essential to keeping your body functioning properly and feeling healthy.
Nearly all of your body's major systems depend on water to function and survive. With water making up about 60% of your body weight, it's no surprise what staying hydrated can do for you.
Here are just a few examples of the ways water works in your body: 

Regulates body temperature
Moistens tissues in the eyes, nose and mouth
Protects body organs and tissues
Carries nutrients and oxygen to cells
Lubricates joints
Lessens burden on the kidneys and liver by flushing out waste products
Dissolves minerals and nutrients to make them accessible to your body

How much water do you need?
Every day, you lose eight to 12 cups of water through breathing, perspiring, and urine and bowel movements. In general, men need at least 12 cups of fluid daily, while women require a minimum of nine cups. Factors that increase your fluid needs include exercise, hot weather, high altitude, a high-fiber diet, and increased losses from caffeine and alcohol intake.
Adequate hydration varies from person to person. A practical way to monitor hydration is by observing the color of your urine right after you get up in the morning. Straw- or lemonade-colored urine is a sign of appropriate hydration. Dark-colored urine — about the color of apple juice — indicates dehydration.
That's why it's important to replenish your body's water supply with beverages and food that contain water.
While you should meet most of your fluid needs by drinking water, beverages such as soups, milk, 100% fruit juice and decaffeinated teas are an option. Fruits and vegetables also contain a fair amount of water. Since it's hard to track the amount of water you get from food, it's best to try for at least eight cups of fluid daily.
Ways to stay hydrated
Developing healthy water habits isn't a heavy lift.
By practicing some of these tips, they'll soon become a natural part of your day:

Start the morning off by drinking a glass of water as soon as you wake up, even before coffee.
Carry a water bottle wherever you go.
Set goals for yourself.
Cut out sugary beverages to avoid empty calories.

By consuming the minimum recommendation of water, you're helping your body function better and improving your overall health. For more information about ways to consume more water and find out if you're getting enough for your body's needs, talk to your health care professional.
Don't like plain water? If you like the tingle of carbonated soda, try club soda, seltzer or sparkling water with a splash of fruit juice. If you're looking for a little flavor in your water, try adding a slice of lemon or lime or making fruit-infused water.
Here's a recipe to try:
Strawberry basil-infused water
1 pint sliced strawberries
10 fresh basil leaves, torn
1 sliced lemon
2 quarts water
Combine strawberries, basil and lemon in a 64-ounce pitcher. Pour water over the top and chill for at least three hours.
This refreshing, flavored water can be stored in the refrigerator for up to two days.
Allie Wergin is a dietitian in Nutrition Counseling and Education in Le Sueur and New Prague, Minnesota.










































Topics in this Post

Nutrition
Get healthy recipes and tips



Related Posts



 
Eating healthy on a budget



 
Do you need to say goodbye to gluten?



 
Check ‘em out: Summer veggie challenge for your whole family 













