Document Name: role of Pot Marigold LS in Eye Cream1
Document link: https://thenerdyfarmwife.com/10-things-to-make-with-calendula-flowers/





























10+ Things to Make With Calendula Flowers












 







































Skip to content
















 









Search		

 













 





 

 







More results... 











 






 







eBook Shop
 



View Cart



























Home
Articles
Plant Inspiration
SoapmakingExpand


Cold Process Soapmaking
Melt and Pour Soap
Handmade Soaps eBooks
Soapmaking Success Course


Natural DIYExpand


DIY Skin/Body Care
Natural Remedies
Aches & Pains eBook
Lotions & Creams eBook
Bath Bombs eBook


 





















eBook Shop
 





View Cart






























 









Search		

 













 





 

 







More results... 











 






 







Toggle Menu




















10+ Things to Make With Calendula Flowers



 


Share

 


Pin

 


Print


Here are over 10 creative ways to use calendula flowers for skin care and health!


Calendula (Calendula officinalis) is an easy to grow herb whose flowers are traditionally used for their beneficial properties:
skin soothingantiseptichealinganti-inflammatory
Calendula is sometimes called pot marigold, which makes it easily confused with common garden marigolds, so make sure you’re working with the right plant.
Visit our sister site, Unruly Gardening, for a helpful article and visual chart showing the differences between calendula (Calendula officinalis) and marigolds (Tagetes spp).


A few notes before we begin:
1. If your calendula flowers are fresh, you’ll need to dry them before making most of these recipes. To do so, spread the flower heads out in a single layer on paper towels or clean dish towels and let them air dry for several days.
2. If you don’t grow your own calendula, you can purchase dried organic flowers from Mountain Rose Herbs.
Some links on this site are affiliate links; I only recommend products I personally use and enjoy. As an Amazon Associate, I earn from qualifying purchases.


1. Calendula Flower Infused Oil
Calendula infused oil can be massaged directly onto dry, irritated skin or used as an ingredient in recipes for salves, diaper balm, lotions, creams, soaps, and lotion bars. Shelf life of strained, infused oil is around 1 year.
You’ll need:
dried calendula flowersyour favorite oil (sunflower, sweet almond, rice bran, apricot kernel, etc)
To make it, fill a canning jar about half-way up with dried calendula flowers. Cover with about twice as much as your favorite carrier oil, or to the top of the jar. 
For a quick infusion: Set the uncovered jar down into a small saucepan filled with a few inches of water. Heat over a low burner for a few hours, keeping a close eye that the water doesn’t evaporate out. Remove from heat and strain. The quick infusion is the best way to infuse coconut oil.
For a slower, more traditional infusion: Cap the jar of calendula flowers and oil and tuck away in a cabinet for around 4 to 6 weeks, shaking occasionally as you remember to. When the infusing time has passed, strain.
For an alternative option: You could also set the jar of flowers and oil in a sunny windowsill for several days to a week to jump start the infusion. (Don’t store for long periods in sunlight though, as it tends to fade flowers and herbs over time.)


2. Calendula Flower Salve
This recipe uses the infused oil we made above. It’s perfect for including in your first aid kit since it helps soothe many minor skin ailments such as scratches, dry spots, diaper rash, razor burn, minor scrapes, insect bites and more. Calendula salve can be used on pets and farm animals too!
To make it, combine 3.5 oz (100 g) of calendula infused oil with 0.5 (15 g) beeswax in a heatproof jar or empty tin can. (For a vegan option – try using roughly half as much candelilla wax instead of beeswax.)
Set the jar/can down into a saucepan containing an inch or two of water. Place the pan over a medium-low burner and heat until the wax is fully melted. Pour the melted mixture into tins or jars. Shelf life of calendula salve is around 1 year.
 










FREE RESOURCE 



 



HERBAL SALVES & BALMS 



Subscribe to the Monthly Maker and receive: 



Build Your Own Salve eGuide 



18 Herbs & Flowers for Salves Chart 



Salve Building Printable Worksheet 



A Monthly Email with Natural Project Ideas 











E-mail							




First Name							







YES, I WANT THIS!









By subscribing to our newsletter, you agree to the terms of our privacy policy. 








3. Whipped Calendula Coconut Oil
This is a super simple recipe that requires only two ingredients:
dried calendula flowerscoconut oil
To make:
Infuse calendula flowers in coconut oil, using the quick method (see #1 above.)Once fully infused and strained, pour the melted calendula-infused coconut oil in a bowl and place it in the refrigerator for about 20 to 30 minutes or until it starts firming up.Remove from the refrigerator and beat the chilled oil with a handheld mixer until it’s light & fluffy. This may take up to 5 minutes.Scoop the coconut oil in a jar and store in a cool area that stays under 76°F (24°C), the melting point of coconut oil.
This recipe can also be found in my Big Book of Homemade Products.


4. Calendula Lotion Bars
Lotion bars are the best thing ever for dry, cracked skin. They’re really easy to throw together and make wonderful gifts too!
Lotion bars are usually made with equal parts (by volume) of infused oil, beeswax and a vegetable butter, such as shea, mango or cocoa. If you make a lotion bar and it feels too soft, just remelt it and add more beeswax. If it feels too hard, remelt it and add more oil. Lotion bars are very forgiving to work with!
To make, combine 1/4 cup (52 g) calendula infused oil, 1/4 cup (28 g) beeswax and 1/4 cup (44 g) shea, mango or cocoa butter in a heatproof canning jar or upcycled tin can. (For a vegan version, use roughly half as much candelilla wax instead of beeswax.) 
Set the jar/can down into a saucepan containing an inch or two of water. Place the pan over a medium-low burner and heat until everything is melted. If you’d like to add a few drops of essential oil for scent, do so at this point. Pour the melted mixture into heatproof silicone candy molds.
To use, rub a lotion bar over your skin wherever it feels dry. They’re especially helpful for spot treating rough feet, knees and elbows. Store your lotion bars in a cool area, out of direct sunlight and they should have a shelf life of around 9 months to a year.


5. Calendula Bar Soap
This is a mild, unscented calendula soap bar that’s very gentle. It’s made with calendula infused oil and calendula tea.
You can find the recipe for calendula soap HERE. (If you’ve never made soap before, visit my Soapmaking 101 post, HERE, first.)
Or, you may also like this Calendula Tallow Soap recipe over at Homestead Honey.


6. Calendula Liquid Soap
This soap is made using a crock pot and potassium hydroxide, to form a soap paste that you can dilute and use as liquid soap.
You can find the recipe and tons of information on making liquid soap from scratch in my article:
How to Make Herbal Liquid Soap from Scratch {+ recipes}


7. Calendula Oatmeal Soak
This bath soak is specially designed for sensitive or itchy skin types. Ground oats soothe irritated skin while calendula flowers calm inflammation. If desired, you can also add a few drops of lavender essential oil for a light relaxing scent.
Ingredients needed: 
2 tbsp dried calendula petals1/4 cup (26 g) rolled oats1/2 cup (144 g) fine sea salt1/4 cup (63 g) Epsom salt2 to 3 drops lavender essential oil mixed with 1/4 teaspoon olive or sunflower oil (optional, for scent)
How to Make: Using an electric coffee grinder, blend the oats and calendula together until finely powdered. Stir together the sea salt and Epsom salt. If using, add the diluted lavender essential oil. Add the powdered oats and calendula and stir until all of the ingredients are thoroughly combined. Store the soak in a tightly closed glass jar for three to four months, keeping in mind that the scent may fade over time.
How to Use: To use, dump the entire cup of bath soak into a bathtub as it fills with comfortably warm water.


8. Calendula Tea
Calendula tea can be used for all sorts of things, from a sore throat gargle to a disinfecting wound spray to a hot spot treatment for dogs.
You can read more about 14 ways to use calendula tea, HERE.


9. Calendula Cupcake Sprinkles
Edible flowers, such as calendula, can be used as all-natural colorants to create cupcake and baking sprinkles that are free from fake colors.
You can find the directions to make them in my article, Naturally Colored Decorating Sugar (using edible flowers). (If you’re sugar free, try the coconut version instead!)


10. Calendula Cream
This lovely calendula cream is thick and rich, almost like a body butter, and can be used like lotion or like a healing salve.
You can find the full recipe and directions to make, over HERE at the Grow Forage Cook Ferment blog.


11. Calendula Cocoa Butter Balm
This Calendula Cocoa Butter Balm is filled with nourishing ingredients.  The cocoa butter is deeply moisturizing and the infused oils are softening and healing as well. The beeswax adds some hardening and further protects the skin.
You can find the full recipe and how to make it, over HERE at the Homespun Seasonal Living blog.


 


Share

 


Pin

 


Print






Post Tags:		
#calendula 








Jan
author, herbalist, soapmaker

Jan Berry is a writer, herbalist, soapmaker, and bestselling author of The Big Book of Homemade Products, Simple & Natural Soapmaking, and Easy Homemade Melt & Pour Soaps. She lives in the Blue Ridge Mountains with her family and a menagerie of animals, where she enjoys brainstorming creative things to make with the flowers and weeds that grow around her. You can also find her writing about gardening and foraging over at her family's website: UnrulyGardening.com!



Facebook
 

Amazon


 




12 Comments 




Mariann Smith says: 

November 11, 2017 at 10:16 am 


thanks Jan for all these beautiful recipes.I am anxious to get started on them all. I esp. love the calendula recipes since I had purchased a big bag a while back and wasn’t sure where to go with it. The cream and salve sound terrific and they will be my first projects. Thank you for your generosity and for letting us enjoy a sample of these wonderful flowers in your recipes.







Jan @ The Nerdy Farm Wife says: 

November 29, 2017 at 8:01 pm 


Hi Mariann, So glad that you enjoy the recipes! I bought a big bag of calendula a while back too – it was much more than expected, but fun to play with! :)









Elaine Hutton says: 

December 2, 2017 at 11:46 am 


I am now a fan of yours and it all started when my daughter sent me a video on dogs paw cream for winter.  Here our pups get dry skin from walking in
the winter.  Well once I made the oil and eight containers of “dog paw wax” I began to look for other uses for this oil.  I down loaded your e book and am off to the races.  Thanks for your generous contribution to my knowledge base and not only are all the dogs I know getting some but my
friends with dry skin will be getting the cream.
Merry Christmas to you and yours!







Jan @ The Nerdy Farm Wife says: 

December 5, 2017 at 9:04 pm 


Hi Elaine, I’m so glad that you’re enjoying the ebook and recipes! I hope you have a very Merry Christmas too! :)







Pingback: Calendula Shave Soap Recipe {dual lye, palm free} 			



Pingback: Lavender Rose Balm Recipe {with calendula} 			





Jen Downer says: 

October 5, 2018 at 11:57 am 


Do the flowers need to be dried to infuse?







Jan @ The Nerdy Farm Wife says: 

October 17, 2018 at 9:13 pm 


Hi Jen! Yes, I like to start with dried flowers. That eliminates the risk of mold and bacterial contamination from decaying plant matter trapped in oil.









Lisa Hawkins says: 

January 1, 2020 at 1:50 pm 


I just infused some calendula and I hate to toss the flowers, what do you do with your used infused flowers?







Jan @ The Nerdy Farm Wife says: 

January 15, 2020 at 3:49 pm 


Hi Lisa! I usually run a second round of oil over the infusion, adding in some more dried flowers if possible, so I get a second use from them. There’s not a lot you can do with them after that, except to scatter them outside. (Not dumped all in one place, because the oil on them isn’t great for any plants or little critters they land on.)









Kelli says: 

May 2, 2022 at 11:36 am 


Hi! I made some Calendula salve but it’s a little too oily/greasy. How can I fix that for future reference?







Jan says: 

June 1, 2022 at 6:45 pm 


Hi Kelli! That has a lot to do with the type of oil used.
Oils that absorb into your skin quickly will feel less greasy than oils that absorb slowly.
Some less greasy oils to try in your next recipe include: jojoba, rice bran, apricot kernel oil, grapeseed, safflower, rosehip.
Fractionated coconut oil (the kind that’s liquid even when cold) is excellent for making products feel lighter on your skin.
You could use about 1/4 of the oil amount as fractionated coconut oil in most recipes & it will feel less greasy.
Heavy oils that feel greasier include olive, sunflower, regular coconut oil – so using less of those, or combining them with light oils will help! :)






Comments are closed.







 















Home
Privacy & Disclaimers
Contact
Subscribe
About
 







Facebook
Instagram
Pinterest
 













 The information on this site is for idea-sharing only. All recipes are made and used at your own risk. The website thenerdyfarmwife.com is a participant in the Amazon Services LLC Associates Program.
As an Amazon Associate we earn from qualifying purchases.
© thenerdyfarmwife.com

 









 
 






















Home
Articles
Plant Inspiration
DIY Skin/Body Care
Natural Remedies
Cold Process Soapmaking
Melt and Pour Soap
Soapmaking Course
Books & eBooksExpand child menuExpand


eBooks
Print Books


Contact
Subscribe
Amazon Shop
 






































