Document Name: role of White Beeswax in Eye Cream1
Document link: https://www.webmd.com/vitamins/ai/ingredientmono-305/beeswax




BEESWAX: Overview, Uses, Side Effects, Precautions, Interactions, Dosing and Reviews




 

























 Skip to main content  Check Your Symptoms  Find A Doctor  Find A Dentist Health  A-Z Health A-Z  Common Conditions   ADD/ADHD  Allergies  Arthritis  Cancer  Coronavirus (COVID-19)  Depression  Diabetes  Eye Health  Heart Disease  Lung Disease  Orthopedics  Pain Management  Sexual Conditions  Skin Problems  Sleep Disorders  View All  Resources   Symptom Checker  WebMD Blogs  Podcasts  Newsletters  WebMD Magazine  Best Hospitals  Find a Doctor  Surgeries and Procedures A-Z  Featured Topics  Slideshow  Signs You Have Already Had COVID  Slideshow  Get Help for Migraine Relief Drugs &  Supplements Drugs & Supplements  Find & Review   Drugs  Supplements  Drug Basics & Safety   Commonly Abused Drugs  Taking Meds When Pregnant  Tools   Manage Your Medications  Pill Identifier  Check for Interactions  Drug Comparison Tool  Featured Topics  Slideshow  Vitamins You Need as You Age  Coronavirus  COVID-19 Vaccines Living  Healthy Living Healthy  Diet, Food & Fitness   Diet & Weight Management  Weight Loss & Obesity  Food & Recipes  Fitness & Exercise  Beauty & Balance   Healthy Beauty  Health & Balance  Sex & Relationships  Oral Care  Living Well   Women's Health  Men's Health  Aging Well  Healthy Sleep  Healthy Teens  Featured Topics  Article  Smart Grocery Shopping When You Have Diabetes  Quiz  Do You Know the Benefits of Walking? Family &  Pregnancy Family & Pregnancy  All About Pregnancy   Getting Pregnant  First Trimester  Second Trimester  Third Trimester  View All  Parenting Guide   Newborn & Baby  Children's Health  Children's Vaccines  View All  Pet Care Essentials   Healthy Cats  Healthy Dogs  View All  Featured Topics  Slideshow  Smart Snacks When You're Pregnant  Slideshow  Surprising Things You Didn't Know About Dogs and Cats News &  Experts News & Experts  Health News   Pets May Actually Help Fight Allergies  Mediterranean, Low-Fat Diets Are Best for Heart Problems  Least Amount of Exercise You Need to Stay Healthy  Nerve 'Pulse' Therapy May Help Ease Sciatica  Who Is Most Likely to Get Long COVID?  Experts & Community   Support Groups  Blogs  Webinars  News Center  New Book: Take Control of Your Heart Disease Risk  Featured Topics  WebMD Editorial Special  MINOCA: The Heart Attack You Didn’t See Coming  Get Our Newsletters  Health News and Information, Delivered to Your Inbox  Sign In  Mobile Apps  Subscriptions  Privacy and More  Sign In  Subscribe  MENU VITAMINS & SUPPLEMENTS CENTER  Find a Vitamin or Supplement  Find a Vitamin by Condition  Assess Your Vitamin Needs  DRUGS AND MEDICATIONS CENTER  Find a Drug  My Medicine  Pill Identifier  Interaction Checker  Latest Drug News  Find a Vitamin  Find a Pharmacy  FIRST AID RESOURCES  First Aid A-Z  First Aid Kit & Wound Care  First Aid Mobile RELATED TO VITAMINS & SUPPLEMENTS Drugs & Medications  Pill Identifier  My Medicine  Interaction Checker  Diet & Weight Management  Food & Recipes  Vitamins & Supplements beeswaxBEESWAX - Uses, Side Effects, and More OTHER NAME(S): Apic cerana, Apis Mel, Apis mellifera, Apis Mellif  ...  Show More  OTHER NAME(S): Apic cerana, Apis Mel, Apis mellifera, Apis Mellif  ...  Show More  Overview  Uses  Side Effects  Precautions  Interactions  Dosing  Reviews (0)  Overview Beeswax is a product made from the honeycomb of the honeybee and other bees. The mixing of pollen oils into honeycomb wax turns the white wax into a yellow or brown color. Beeswax is used for high cholesterol, pain, fungal skin infections, and other conditions. But there is no good scientific research to support these uses.  In foods and beverages, white beeswax and beeswax absolute (yellow beeswax treated with alcohol) are used as stiffening agents. In manufacturing, yellow and white beeswax are used as thickeners, emulsifiers, and as stiffening agents in cosmetics. Beeswax absolute is used as a fragrance in soaps and perfumes. White beeswax and beeswax absolute are also used to polish pills.  How does it work ? Beeswax might help lower cholesterol levels, prevent infections, and help protect the stomach from ulcers caused by non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Uses & Effectiveness  ?  Insufficient Evidence for  Small tears in the lining of the anus (anal fissures). Early research shows that applying a mixture of beeswax, honey, and olive oil to the affected area for 12 hours reduces pain, bleeding, and itching due to anal fissures. Burns. Early research shows that applying a gauze with a mixture of beeswax, olive oil, and alkanna to second-degree burns speeds up healing and shortens the time spent in the hospital. Other early research shows that using a particular beeswax cream can decrease itching that occurs when a burn is healing.  Diaper rash. Early research shows that applying a mixture of beeswax, honey, and olive oil to the affected area four times daily for 7 days reduces symptoms of diaper rash.  Hemorrhoids. Early research shows that applying a mixture of beeswax, honey, and olive oil to the affected area for 12 hours reduces pain, bleeding, and itching due to hemorrhoids. Swelling (inflammation) and sores inside the mouth (oral mucositis). Early research shows that applying a mixture of honey, olive oil-propolis extract, and beeswax to mouth sores caused by cancer treatment helps speed up recovery time in people with severe ulcers. But it may not work as well in people with moderate ulcers. Also, applying honey by itself may work better than the beeswax mixture.  Ringworm (Tinea corporis). Early research shows that applying a mixture of beeswax, honey, and olive oil to the affected area three times daily for 4 weeks improves ringworm. Jock itch (tinea cruris). Early research shows that applying a mixture of beeswax, honey, and olive oil to the affected area three times daily for 4 weeks improves jock itch. A common fungal infection of the skin (Tinea versicolor). Early research shows that applying a mixture of beeswax, honey, and olive oil to the affected area three times daily for 4 weeks improves a fungal skin infection called tinea versicolor. Diarrhea. Hiccups. High levels of cholesterol or other fats (lipids) in the blood (hyperlipidemia). Pain. Stomach ulcers. Other conditions. More evidence is needed to rate the effectiveness of beeswax for these uses. Side Effects When taken by mouth: Beeswax is LIKELY SAFE for most people when taken by mouth as food or as a medicine. While rare, some people may have an allergic reaction to beeswax. When applied to the skin: Beeswax is LIKELY SAFE for most people when applied directly to the skin. While rare, some people may have an allergic skin rash after applying beeswax.  Special Precautions  and Warnings When taken by mouth: Beeswax is LIKELY SAFE for most people when taken by mouth as food or as a medicine. While rare, some people may have an allergic reaction to beeswax. When applied to the skin: Beeswax is LIKELY SAFE for most people when applied directly to the skin. While rare, some people may have an allergic skin rash after applying beeswax.  Pregnancy and breast-feeding: There isn't enough reliable information to know if beeswax is safe to use when pregnant or breast-feeding. Stay on the safe side and avoid use. Interactions  ?  We currently have no information for BEESWAX overview.  Dosing The appropriate dose of beeswax depends on several factors such as the user's age, health, and several other conditions. At this time there is not enough scientific information to determine an appropriate range of doses for beeswax. Keep in mind that natural products are not always necessarily safe and dosages can be important. Be sure to follow relevant directions on product labels and consult your pharmacist or physician or other healthcare professional before using. Next  View References  REFERENCES:  Al-Waili, N. S. An alternative treatment for pityriasis versicolor, tinea cruris, tinea corporis and tinea faciei with topical application of honey, olive oil and beeswax mixture: an open pilot study. Complement Ther Med 2004;12(1):45-47. View abstract.  Al-Waili, N. S. Clinical and mycological benefits of topical application of honey, olive oil and beeswax in diaper dermatitis. Clin Microbiol.Infect. 2005;11(2):160-163. View abstract.  Al-Waili, N. S. Mixture of honey, beeswax and olive oil inhibits growth of Staphylococcus aureus and Candida albicans. Arch Med Res 2005;36(1):10-13. View abstract.  Al-Waili, N. S. Topical application of natural honey, beeswax and olive oil mixture for atopic dermatitis or psoriasis: partially controlled, single-blinded study. Complement Ther Med 2003;11(4):226-234. View abstract.  Hargrove, J. L., Greenspan, P., and Hartle, D. K. Nutritional significance and metabolism of very long chain fatty alcohols and acids from dietary waxes. Exp.Biol Med (Maywood.) 2004;229(3):215-226. View abstract.  Illnait, J., Terry, H., Mas, R., Fernandez, L., and Carbajal, D. Effects of D-002, a product isolated from beeswax, on gastric symptoms of patients with osteoarthritis treated with piroxicam: a pilot study. J Med Food 2005;8(1):63-68. View abstract.  Menendez, R., Amor, A. M., Rodeiro, I., Gonzalez, R. M., Gonzalez, P. C., Alfonso, J. L., and Mas, R. Policosanol modulates HMG-CoA reductase activity in cultured fibroblasts. Arch Med Res 2001;32(1):8-12. View abstract.  Abdulrhman M., El Barbary N. S., Ahmed Amin D., and Saeid Ebrahim R. Honey and a mixture of honey, beeswax, and olive oil-propolis extract in treatment of chemotherapy-induced oral mucositis: a randomized controlled pilot study. Pediatr Hematol Oncol 2012;29(3):285-292. View abstract.  Al-Waili, N. S., Saloom, K. S., Al-Waili, T. N., and Al-Waili, A. N. The safety and efficacy of a mixture of honey, olive oil, and beeswax for the management of hemorrhoids and anal fissure: a pilot study. ScientificWorldJournal 2006;6:1998-2005. View abstract.  Carbajal D, Molina V, Valdes S, et al. Anti-inflammatory activity of D-002: an active product isolated from beeswax. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 1998;59:235-8. View abstract.  Carbajal D, Molina V, Valdes S, et al. Anti-ulcer activity of higher primary alcohols of beeswax. J Pharm Pharmacol 1995;47:731-3. View abstract.  Carbajal D, Molina V, Valdes S, et al. Possible cytoprotective mechanism in rats of D-002, an  anti-ulcerogenic product isolated from beeswax. J Pharm Pharmacol 1996;48:858-60. View abstract.  Electronic Code of Federal Regulations. Title 21. Part 182 -- Substances Generally Recognized As Safe. Available at: https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfcfr/CFRSearch.cfm?CFRPart=182  Fratini F, Cilia G, Turchi B, Felicioli A. Beeswax: A minireview of its antimicrobial activity and its application in medicine. Asian Pac J Trop Med. 2016;9(9):839-843. View abstract.  Gümüs K, Özlü ZK. The effect of a beeswax, olive oil and Alkanna tinctorial (L.) Tausch mixture on burn injuries: An experimental study with a control group. Complement Ther Med. 2017;34:66-73. View abstract.  Koukourakis G, Pissakas G, Ganos CG, Sivolapenko G, Kardamakis D. Effectiveness and tolerability of natural herbal formulations in the prevention of radiation-induced skin toxicity in patients undergoing radiotherapy. Int J Low Extrem Wounds 2020:1534734620923912. View abstract.  Lewis PA, Wright K, Webster A, et al. A randomized controlled pilot study comparing aqueous cream with a beeswax and herbal oil cream in the provision of relief from postburn pruritus. J Burn Care Res 2012;33(4):e195-200. View abstract.  Nyman GSA, Tang M, Inerot A, Osmancevic A, Malmberg P, Hagvall L. Contact allergy to beeswax and propolis among patients with cheilitis or facial dermatitis. Contact Dermatitis 2019;81(2):110-6. View abstract.  Search Vitamins  Related Vitamins Common Searches:  Alpha Lipoic Acid  Apple Cider Vinegar  Black Cohosh  Calcium  Chromium  Coenzyme Q - 10  DHEA  Flaxseed  Folic Acid  Ginko  Glucosamine  Melatonin  Niacin  Magnesium  Probiotics  Red Yeast Rice  St. John's Wort  Vitamin C  Vitamin D  Vitamin E  Show More  Show Less  Select a condition to view a list of vitamins  Anal fissures  Burns  Diaper rash  Hemorrhoids  Oral mucositis  Radiation dermatitis  Tinea corporis  Tinea cruris  Tinea versicolor  View More You Might Also Like 5 Health Benefits of Hemp  Navigating Life With Migraine  Alternative Treatments for Migraines  The Role Gut Bacteria Plays on the Overall Body  Zinc  6 Good Food Sources of Zinc  Understanding Heartburn: The Basics  View More CONDITIONS OF USE AND IMPORTANT INFORMATION: This information is meant to supplement, not replace advice from your doctor or healthcare provider and is not meant to cover all possible uses, precautions, interactions or adverse effects. This information may not fit your specific health circumstances. Never delay or disregard seeking professional medical advice from your doctor or other qualified health care provider because of something you have read on WebMD. You should always speak with your doctor or health care professional before you start, stop, or change any prescribed part of your health care plan or treatment and to determine what course of therapy is right for you.  This copyrighted material is provided by Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database Consumer Version. Information from this source is evidence-based and objective, and without commercial influence. For professional medical information on natural medicines, see Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database Professional Version. © Therapeutic Research Faculty 2020. Today on WebMD Vitamins Quiz  Do you know your vitamin ABCs?  11 Supplements for Menopause  Ease hot flashes and other symptoms.  Vitamin B12  Are you getting enough?  Vitamin D  Wonder pill or overkill? Recommended for You Video  Powerhouse Fruits and Veggies  Slideshow  Supplements You Shouldn't Try  Slideshow  Why You Need Vitamin E Health Solutions from Our Sponsors Penis Curved When Erect?  Could I have CAD?  Treat Bent Fingers  Treat HR+, HER2- MBC  Tired of Dandruff?  Benefits of CBD  Rethink MS Treatment  AFib-Related Strokes  Risk of a Future DVT/PE  Is My Penis Normal?  Relapsing MS Options  Liver Transplants Save Lives  Finance Plastic Surgery  Bent Finger Causes  Living With Psoriasis?  Missing Teeth? More from WebMD 5 Tips to Help With Relapsing MS  How to Thrive With Narcolepsy  Relief for Blocked Hair Follicles  Psoriatic Arthritis and Your Sleep  What Psoriasis Feels Like  First Psoriatic Arthritis Flare  Talking to Your Doctor About RA  Crohn's: A 'Full-Body' Disease  Avoiding Crohn’s Flares  Health Benefits of Hemp Seed Oil  Live Better With Psoriatic Disease  Types of B-Cell Therapy for MS  5 Health Benefits of Hemp  Why Prostate Cancer Spreads  Living with Advanced Breast Cancer  Where Breast Cancer Spreads  Find us on:  Facebook  Twitter  Pinterest  Policies  Privacy Policy  Cookie Policy  Editorial Policy  Advertising Policy  Correction Policy  Terms of Use  About  Contact Us  About WebMD  Careers  Newsletter  Corporate  WebMD Health Services  Site Map  Accessibility  Our Apps  WebMD Mobile  WebMD App  Pregnancy  Baby  Allergy  For Advertisers  Advertise with Us  Advertising Policy © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, an Internet Brands company. All rights reserved.WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information. 








