Document Name: role of Adeps adeps in Eye Cream2
Document link: https://dermnetnz.org/topics/allergy-to-wool-alcohols































Wool alcohols contact allergy  | DermNet














































DermNet provides Google Translate, a free machine translation service. Note that this may not provide an exact translation in all languages









logo-white-2022












Topics A-Z


Images


Cases


Jobs


More 
selector copy










Skin checker


About


Browse


Glossary


Quizzes


Donate


Contact










searchable









Translate 















TOPICS A-Z 


IMAGES 


CASES 


JOBS 


SKIN CHECKER 


ABOUT 


BROWSE 


GLOSSARY 


QUIZZES 


DONATE 


CONTACT 
















Home


    arrow-right-small-blue
  



Topics A–Z


    arrow-right-small-blue
  



Allergy to wool alcohols





info-icon









print-icon













            Allergy to wool alcohols — codes and concepts
        




Synonyms:

Wool alcohol allergy,
Lanolin allergic contact dermatitis,
Adeps lanae anhydrous allergy,
Aloholes lanae allergy,
Amerchol allergy,
Anhydrous lanolin allergy,
Lanolin allergy,
Lanolin alcohol allergy,
Wool fat allergy,
Wool grease allergy,
Wool wax allergy



Categories:

Eczema or dermatitis,
Reaction to external agent



Subcategories:

Cosmetics,
Pharmaceuticals,
Industrial,
Sunscreens



ICD-10:

Y56.3, L23.2



ICD-11:

XM8WH4



SNOMED CT:

294330005, 39592206, 350104000






Allergy to wool alcohols

Author: Vanessa Ngan, Staff Writer, 2002.





toc-icon










                Table of contents
                


    arrow-right-small
  





What are wool alcohols?
Where is it found?
Clinical features
Diagnosis
Treatment
Prevention
Alternative names
Further information


















What are wool alcohols?Wool alcohols are the principle component of lanolin in which allergens are found. Lanolin is a natural product obtained from the fleece of sheep. Sebum is extracted from the wool, cleaned and refined to produce anhydrous lanolin. This comprises 3 parts, wool alcohols, fatty alcohols and fatty acids. Currently the wool alcohols are considered the main sensitisers in lanolin but whether they are the sole sensitisers, needs further investigation. Nowadays there is also chemically modified lanolin that may be less sensitising than natural lanolin.Wool alcohols, wool fat, anhydrous lanolin, lanolin alcohol, wool wax and wool grease are just some of the terms used interchangeably with lanolin. In this article we will use wool alcohols, as it is this fraction of lanolin that is the main cause of contact allergies.What products contain wool alcohols?Lanolin is a good emulsifier; this means it binds well with water thus it is particularly useful in the manufacture of pharmaceutical and cosmetic formulations. Wool alcohols are found in many pharmaceutical preparations, cosmetics and toiletries. They also have some industrial uses.Pharmaceuticals
Cosmetics/toiletries
Industrial

Steroid-containing creams/ointments
Haemorrhoidal preparations
Medicated shampoos
Veterinary products
Liniments


Hand creams
Moisturizers
Protective creams
Self-tanners
Sunscreens
Glossy lipsticks
Makeup removers
Foundations, powders
Eye makeup
Hairspray
Shaving creams
Baby oils, diaper lotions


Printing ink
Furniture and shoe polishers
Textile finishers
Lubricants, cutting fluids
Paper
Leather

What are the reactions of allergy to wool alcohols?Typical allergic contact dermatitis reactions may occur in individuals allergic to wool alcohols. The rash is characteristically located on the face, hands and arms. There may be intense swelling and redness of the affected area within a few hours or the rash may appear after a day or two of the product being used.












Am I allergic to wool alcohols?Patch testing using 30% wool alcohol in petrolatum is what is routinely used to test for sensitivity to wool alcohols. Although wool alcohols are the main sensitisers in lanolin they may not always be the cause of the sensitivity and patch testing with natural lanolin from several sources is also recommended.The development of chemically modified lanolin may help to reduce the incidence of skin reactions to natural lanolin. However, there have been cases where patients have shown marked sensitivity to modified lanolin, yet not to natural lanolin. Dermatitis caused by modified lanolin may be missed if patch testing is confined to testing with wool alcohols and natural lanolin only.Since lanolin is a natural product, its constituents vary depending on its source. Therefore an individual may be allergic to some lanolin-containing products but not to others. Self-testing a product for allergy to lanolin-containing products is possible but should be done only after first talking with your doctor. This should be done only with products that are designed to stay on the skin such as cosmetics and lotions. Apply a small amount (50 cent sized area) of the product to a small tender area of skin such as the bend of your arm or neck daily for 5 to 7 days. Examine the area each day and if no reaction occurs, it is unlikely you are allergic to it, although it may still act as an irritant. Products such as soaps, polishers and waxes should not be tested in this way.Management of dermatitis caused by wool alcohol allergyOnce the dermatitis appears on the skin, the first thing to do is to remove the source. In most instances this would entail stopping the use of all products that contain lanolin.Standard treatment with emollients and topical steroids must not contain lanolin.What should I do to avoid wool alcohol allergy?If you have wool alcohol allergy the best way to avoid any problems is by avoiding all products that contain wool alcohols. Check all product labels for the list of ingredients and do not use if they contain wool alcohols or any of the other names for wool alcohols. If you are unsure, ask your pharmacist for advice and a suitable alternative.Alert your doctor to the fact that you have an allergy to wool alcohols. This is particularly important as some topical medications that your doctor may want to prescribe to you contain wool alcohols.Your dermatologist may have further specific advice, particularly if you are highly sensitive to wool alcohols.












Alternative names for wool alcoholWool alcohol is also known by several other names. These include:Adeps lanae anhydrous
Aloholes lanae
Amerchol
Anhydrous lanolin
Lanolin
Wool fat
Wool grease
Wool wax
Avoid all of these. At work, request a material safety data sheet to help identify potential sources of exposure.Further informationCross reactions: cetyl or stearyl alcohols (Eucerin™, Aquaphor™)Sensitizer: Wool alcohol is the main sensitiser in lanolinPatch Test: Wool alcohol 30% in petrolatum



























 

ReferenceBook: Fisher's Contact Dermatitis. Ed Rietschel RL, Fowler JF. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins 2001
On DermNetDermatitis
Allergic contact dermatitis
Patch testing
Cosmetics allergy
Other websitesT.R.U.E. Tests
 Allergic contact dermatitis — Medscape Reference
Relevance of positive reactions to wool alcohols — EECDRG

Books about skin diseasesBooks about the skin
Dermatology Made Easy book




 
Related information

































Sign up to the newsletter






Full name




Email address




Tell us your profession or specialty

Profession or specialty
	
Dermatologist
	
GP
	
HCP
	
Marketing/media
	
Medical student or physician in training
	
Patient
	
Caregiver
	





SPAM PROTECTION - DO NOT FILL THIS FIELD IN

















IMPORTANT NOTE:


DermNet does not provide an online consultation service.If you have any concerns with your skin or its treatment, see a dermatologist for advice.







Sponsors
Donate
Website terms
FAQ
Advertising policy
Privacy policy
Image licence
Newsletter
Volunteer
Submit a photo







logo-white-2022









  © 2023 DermNet New Zealand Trust. 



footer-facebook






footer-twitter






footer-youtube






footer-instagram











        Creative Commons License
    





























logo-dark-2022







© 2023 DermNet New Zealand Trust. 
DermNet does not provide an online consultation service. If you have any concerns with your skin or its treatment, see a dermatologist for advice.








