Document Name: role of Preservative in Eye Cream4
Document link: https://systane.myalcon.com/products/systane-nighttime/



  



















SYSTANE® Nighttime Eye Ointment | Systane®



























Skip to main content


          
Level 1


Contact Lenses


Eye Care Products


LASIK


Cataract



            US      MyAlcon for Professionals                             John Smith  [email protected]        
Level 1


Contact Lenses


Eye Care Products


LASIK


Cataract



     Log out        MyAlcon for Professionals    
     My Alcon | Language This site is available in English....      Select other country   
      Systane | United States  This site is available in English. Select below for other countries.             Systane Global Sites
 
Americas
     Canada - English / French
     United States - English
     Brasil - Portuguese
 Europe / Middle East / Africa
     Norway - Norwegian
     Sweden - Swedish
     Denmark - Danish
     Finland – Finnish
     Spain – Spanish
     Greece – Greek
     België - Nederlands / Français
     Czech Republic – Czech
     Slovakia – Slovak
     Portugal – Português
 Asia Pacific
     Australia - English
     Malaysia – English
     Hong Kong - 繁體中文  / English
     Philippines – English
     Singapore – English
 
 
__PRESENT__PRESENT
        COMING SOON
 
Americas
     Mexico
     Colombia
     Chile
     Argentina
     Ecuador
     Peru
     Uruguay
 Europe / Middle East / Africa
     Italy
     France
 
Asia Pacific
     South Korea
     China
     Singapore
       
  
 EXPLORE         
Supernav - Brand Menus


Products


Plan for Real Relief


About Dry Eye


Coupons


FAQs



    BUY    
  

 



          
SYSTANE® NIGHTTIME Eye Ointment
 
Dry eye relief while you sleep
 
SYSTANE® NIGHTTIME Ointment is designed to keep your eyes lubricated and comfortable while you sleep. It forms a smooth, protective layer for the eyes that provides dry eye symptom relief at night.

   Buy Now   Get Coupon                       
         
Product Details

Nighttime protection 
Preservative-free formula
Remove contact lenses before use
Available in 3.5g tubes
                      
    Drug Facts
       DIRECTIONS FOR USE    Pull down the lower lid of the affected eye and apply a small amount (one-fourth inch) of ointment to the inside of the eyelid.   
USES    For use as a lubricant to prevent further irritation or to relieve dryness of the eye.   
INGREDIENTS    Active Ingredients
      
Purpose
Mineral Oil 3%
      
Lubricant
White Petrolatum 94%
      
Lubricant
 
Inactive Ingredients
Anhydrous Liquid Lanolin 3%.
  
SAFETY    For external use only. Do not use if you are sensitive to any ingredient in this product When using this product, remove contact lenses first. To avoid contamination, do not touch tip container to any surface, and replace after using. Stop use and ask a doctor if you experience any of the following:eye painchanges in visionredness or irritation of the eye(s) that gets worse, persists or lasts longer than 72 hours Keep out of reach of children. If swallowed, get medical help or contact a Poison Control Center right away. Store at room temperature and protect from light.   
     
   Buy Now
  
   Other Products You Might Like:                  SYSTANE® COMPLETE Lubricant Eye Drops
 
Tiny, nano-sized droplets form a soothing matrix of protection across the entire eye surface for 8 hours of long-lasting relief for all types of dry eye.
 
*vs SYSTANE® BALANCE
     LEARN MORE    
           Systane® iLux® MGD Thermal Pulsation System
 
The Systane® iLUX® MGD Thermal Pulsation System delivers treatment directly to the blocked meibomian glands with the goal of clearing obstructions.
 
 
     LEARN MORE    
   
         
 
 
Still not sure? Take the dry eye quiz.

 
Get personalized dry eye product recommendations and helpful tips to reduce symptoms and triggers that may impact your eyes. It’s time to find a plan that’s designed for you.
 
 
GET STARTED
                     
                         
   Important Information for iLux® Device:
 
The iLux® Device is used to heat and compress glands in the eyelids of adult patients with a specific type of dry eye, called Meibomian Gland Dysfunction (MGD), also known as evaporative dry eye. 
 
Potential side effects may include eyelid/eye pain requiring stopping the treatment procedure, eyelid/eye irritation or inflammation, temporary reddening of the skin, and other eye symptoms (burning, stinging, tearing, itching, discharge, redness, feeling like there is something in the eye, changes in your vision, sensitivity to light). 
 
Ask your eye care professional for a complete list of safety information for the iLux® Device.
  
   ©2021 Alcon Inc. US-SYC-2100063   




       
 


What is Dry Eye?


Dry Eye Symptoms


What Causes Dry Eye?


Tips for Dry Eye


 


SYSTANE® COMPLETE >


SYSTANE® HYDRATION >


SYSTANE® ULTRA Lubricant Eye Drops >


Get a Coupon >


     


Privacy Notices


Cookie Notice


Exercise your Rights


Terms of Use


              








