Document Name: role of Fragrance in Protective Cream3
Document link: https://www.cerave.com/skincare/moisturizers/moisturizing-cream



















Moisturizing Cream | For Face & Body | CeraVe 

 




 





SPF






Main Navigation

























Contact Us


FAQs


Coupons


Find A Derm


For Health Care Providers





















our products




See new products


See best sellers





By category




All Products


Eye Creams


Facial Cleansers


Facial Moisturizers


Body Cleansers


Body Moisturizers


Facial Serums


Makeup Removers


Sunscreens


For Baby


Ointment






By Concern




Acne


Anti-aging


Cracked, Chafed Skin


Diabetic Skin


Eczema


Itchy Skin


Psoriasis


Rough and Bumpy






By Skin Type




Combination Skin


Dry Skin


Normal Skin


Oily Skin


Sensitive Skin






By Key Ingredient




Benzoyl Peroxide


Dimethicone


Hyaluronic Acid


Lactic Acid


Niacinamide


Petrolatum


Pramoxine Hydrochloride


Retinol


Salicylic Acid


Titanium Dioxide


Urea


Vitamin C


Zinc Oxide






Sunscreens




For Face


For Body


For Baby


Mineral Sunscreens


Moisturizers with SPF


Sunscreen Sticks


Sunscreen Lotions









Cerave Ingredients




Learn more about Ceramides





Ingredients




Ingredients Home


Benzoyl Peroxide


Ceramides


Dimethicone


Glycolic Acid


Hyaluronic Acid


Jojoba Oil


Lactic Acid


Niacinamide


Peptides


Petrolatum


Pramoxine Hydrochloride


Retinol


Salicylic Acid


Titanium Dioxide


Urea


Vitamin C


Zinc Oxide









Skin Smarts




Skin Smarts Home 


Skincare Tips & Advice


Skincare Routines


Skincare For Baby


Strength of Ceramides





Skin Concerns 101




Acne


Diabetic Skin


Eczema


Itchy Skin


Psoriasis


Rough & Bumpy Skin


Sensitive Skin


Sun Protection


Dry Skin









Why Cerave




Why Cerave


Developed With Dermatologists


The Ceramides Difference






Skincare Solution Finder




WHERE TO BUY













Home



/

Skincare



/

Moisturizers



/
Moisturizing Cream

















Moisturizing Cream


Buy Online


Find in Stores
























Thumbnail Play icon alternative text

































can't play video wihout JS






































Can't play video without JS






















Moisturizing Cream


Moisturizing Cream
3 ESSENTIAL CERAMIDES



Barrier-restoring moisturizing cream for face and body


A compromised skin barrier can lead to skin that looks dry, scaly, rough, or flaky. It might also feel irritated, itchy, or uncomfortable. This is because, when your skin barrier is disrupted, it may be unable to keep essential moisture in (and harmful irritants out). Including a barrier-restoring cream with ingredients like hyaluronic acid and ceramides in your daily skincare routine can help restore the look and feel of smooth, supple, and healthy-looking skin.

CeraVe Moisturizing Cream is a rich, non-greasy, fast-absorbing moisturizer for normal to dry skin on the face and body. Formulated with three essential ceramides, it works to lock in skin's moisture and help maintain your skin’s protective barrier. Our moisturizing cream also features hyaluronic acid, petrolatum, and MVE Delivery Technology—which works by continually releasing moisturizing ingredients for long-lasting hydration. Developed with dermatologists, this barrier-restoring cream is gentle on skin, fragrance-free, and accepted by the National Eczema Association.




Buy Online


Find in Stores




AQUA / WATER / EAU, GLYCERIN, CETEARYL ALCOHOL, CAPRYLIC/CAPRIC TRIGLYCERIDE, CETYL ALCOHOL, CETEARETH-20, PETROLATUM, POTASSIUM PHOSPHATE, CERAMIDE NP, CERAMIDE AP, CERAMIDE EOP, CARBOMER, DIMETHICONE, BEHENTRIMONIUM METHOSULFATE, SODIUM LAUROYL LACTYLATE, SODIUM HYALURONATE, CHOLESTEROL, PHENOXYETHANOL, DISODIUM EDTA, DIPOTASSIUM PHOSPHATE, TOCOPHEROL, PHYTOSPHINGOSINE, XANTHAN GUM, ETHYLHEXYLGLYCERIN

Please be aware that ingredient lists for the products of our brand are updated regularly. Please refer to the ingredient list on your product package for the most up-to-date list of ingredients to ensure it is suitable to your personal use. 



Suitable for normal to dry skin on the face and body
MVE Technology: This delivery system continually releases moisturizing ingredients for 48-hour hydration—supporting your protective skin barrier, long after you’ve finished applying.
Ceramides: Help maintain the skin’s natural barrier
Hyaluronic acid: Helps retain skin’s natural moisture
Non-comedogenic and fragrance-free
Developed with dermatologists
Accepted by the National Eczema Association and American Diabetes Association




Apply liberally as often as needed, or as directed by a physician






SAVE NOW! Up to $4.00 on every product










Product Features & Benefits 





































I recommend CeraVe Moisturizing Cream to my diverse patient population because its gentle, fragrance-free formula helps repair and maintain a healthy skin barrier by replenishing ceramides and locking in hydration.
 








Dr. Tiffany Clay,
Board Certified Dermatologist









Frequently Asked Questions 




CeraVe Moisturizing Cream is formulated with a number of skin-supporting ingredients, such as our three essential ceramides, hyaluronic acid, petrolatum, and dimethicone. To learn more about the skincare benefits of each of these ingredients, head to Ingredients in CeraVe. This moisturizing formula also contains MVE Delivery Technology, which encapsulates ceramides and hydrating ingredients to ensure efficient delivery within the skin’s barrier and slow release over time (for long-lasting hydration).





Most skin types can use CeraVe Moisturizing Cream, since this formula is fragrance-free, allergy-tested, and non-comedogenic (meaning it won’t clog your pores). It’s also been developed with dermatologists and is accepted by the National Eczema Association. Although it can be used by most skin types, CeraVe Moisturizing Cream is especially beneficial for those with normal to dry skin.





CeraVe Moisturizing Cream can be applied as a face cream or body cream to help restore the appearance of hydrated, healthy-looking skin. This makes it a convenient skincare option for anyone who prefers formulas that can be used on multiple areas. 





These two moisturizing formulas differ mainly in their texture. CeraVe Moisturizing Cream features a rich, yet non-greasy cream texture that makes it ideal for those with normal to dry skin on their face or body. It contains petrolatum, an occlusive ingredient that helps seal in moisture by creating a physical barrier on the skin’s surface. CeraVe Daily Moisturizing Lotion, on the other hand, is designed with a lightweight, oil-free lotion texture that may be better suited for normal to oily skin on your face or body. It contains beneficial ingredients such as glycerin and dimethicone. 





There are many benefits to incorporating a skin barrier-restoring cream, like CeraVe Moisturizing Cream, into your daily skincare regimen. One of the top benefits is our formula’s ability to lock in moisture and help maintain your skin’s protective barrier. This natural barrier (formally known as the stratum corneum) is essential for healthy-looking skin. When functioning properly, the skin barrier works to keep moisture in and irritants out. When your skin barrier is disrupted, it can result in a host of skin concerns (such as dry, itchy skin) and can exacerbate skin conditions like eczema.  





Like many moisturizers, CeraVe Moisturizing Cream helps hydrate and soothe skin, while also helping to reduce dryness. However, the starting point for every CeraVe formula is its unique blend of three essential ceramides. Our moisturizer formula has been clinically tested to lock in moisture and help maintain your skin’s protective barrier. Developed with dermatologists, it also features MVE Delivery Technology that helps release a steady stream of moisturizing ingredients for long-lasting hydration. 





CeraVe Moisturizing Cream can be applied as a face cream twice daily (morning and night), or as needed when your skin is feeling dry. For your body, apply liberally as often as needed. Always apply this product per the directions on the label, or as directed by a physician or dermatologist. To learn more, explore our tips for moisturizing properly in Moisturizing 101.





Oily skin is a skin type that over-produces sebum (oil), which can give the skin a shiny, greasy-looking appearance. This can lead some people to believe that oily skin doesn’t need moisturizer. In reality, oily skin requires just as much moisture as other skin types. When your skin isn’t properly hydrated, it may even cause your skin to compensate by producing more oil.

If your skin is oily or acne-prone, we recommend choosing lightweight moisturizer formulas that are labeled “non-comedogenic.” This means the product has been formulated not to clog your pores. For personalized advice on how to moisturize oily skin, consult a physician or board-certified dermatologist. They can assess your skin and offer professional advice on the best products and lightweight moisturizer options for your skin’s needs.





To help care for and protect your baby’s delicate skin, we recommend CeraVe Baby Moisturizing Cream. This gentle, lightweight baby lotion was developed with pediatric dermatologists to deliver three essential ceramides and help maintain your baby’s skin barrier as it develops. Formulated with vitamin E and hyaluronic acid, our Baby Moisturizing Cream is non-greasy and free of parabens, dyes, and fragrance. To learn more, browse our tips and advice on caring for baby's delicate skin.














Personalized skincare Developed with  DermatologistsReady at your finger tips

Take the quiz







































Our Products 


Skincare Solution Finder 


CeraVe Ingredients 


Skin Smarts 


Why CeraVe 


Skincare Solution Finder 


Where To Buy 







Contact Us 


Accessibility Statement 


Countries And Regions 


Find A Dermatologist 


User Content Permission Terms 


FAQs 


Privacy Policy 


Coupons 


Skincare.com 


Healthcare Professionals 


Mobile Terms 


Terms of Use 


Samples 


My cookie settings 


Notice at Collection Point 


Your Privacy Choices 


Sitemap 







This site is intended for US consumers. Cookies and related technology are used for advertising. To learn more or opt-out, visit AdChoices and our Privacy Policy.

CeraVe does not treat underlying skin conditions. MVE is a registered trademark of DFB Technology, Ltd. Patent No. 6,709,663. © 2022 CeraVe




facebook







twitter







instagram












Message


Download Chrome










