Document Name: role of Methylparaben/Preservative in Barrier Cream0
Document link: https://www.fda.gov/cosmetics/cosmetic-ingredients/parabens-cosmetics






































Parabens in Cosmetics | FDA









Skip to main content
Skip to FDA Search
Skip to in this section menu
Skip to footer links

 

 




An official website of the United States government
Here’s how you know  





The .gov means it’s official.Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing sensitive information, make sure you're on a federal government site.





The site is secure. The https:// ensures that you are connecting to the official website and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely.









U.S. Food and Drug Administration





 
Search


 
Menu






Search FDA


Submit search





 

Featured

Contact FDA
FDA Guidance Documents
Recalls, Market Withdrawals and Safety Alerts
Press Announcements
Warning Letters
Advisory Committees
En Español





Products

Food
Drugs
Medical Devices
Radiation-Emitting Products
Vaccines, Blood, and Biologics
Animal and Veterinary
Cosmetics
Tobacco Products



Topics

About FDA
Combination Products
Regulatory Information
Safety
Emergency Preparedness
International Programs
News and Events
Training and Continuing Education
Inspections and Compliance
Science and Research



Information For

Consumers
Patients
Industry
Health Professionals
Federal, State and Local Officials









In this section:

                Cosmetic Ingredients
    
    





                                        Cosmetic Ingredients
                    



Allergens in Cosmetics
Alpha Hydroxy Acids
Beta Hydroxy Acids
Diethanolamine
Fragrances in Cosmetics
Latex in Cosmetics
Parabens in Cosmetics
Per and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS) in Cosmetics
Phthalates in Cosmetics
Talc














Home


Cosmetics


Cosmetic Products & Ingredients


Cosmetic Ingredients


Parabens in Cosmetics





     Cosmetic Ingredients
    








Parabens in Cosmetics



Share


Tweet


Linkedin


Email


Print









Parabens are commonly used as preservatives in cosmetics. Here are answers to questions that consumers often ask about the safety and use of these ingredients.
What are parabens, and why are they used in cosmetics?
What kinds of products contain parabens?
Does FDA regulate preservatives in cosmetics?
Are parabens safe in cosmetics? Are they linked to breast cancer or other health problems?
What are parabens, and why are they used in cosmetics?
Parabens are a family of related chemicals that are commonly used as preservatives in cosmetic products. Preservatives may be used in cosmetics to prevent the growth of harmful bacteria and mold, in order to protect both the products and consumers.
The parabens used most commonly in cosmetics are methylparaben, propylparaben, butylparaben, and ethylparaben.
Product ingredient labels typically list more than one paraben in a product, and parabens are often used in combination with other types of preservatives to better protect against a broad range of microorganisms.
What kinds of products contain parabens?
Parabens are used in a wide variety of cosmetics, as well as in foods and drugs. Cosmetics that may contain parabens include makeup, moisturizers, hair care products, and shaving products, among others. Many major brands of deodorants do not currently contain parabens, although some may.
Cosmetics sold to consumers in stores or online must have a list of ingredients, each listed by its common or usual name. This is important information for consumers who want to find out whether a product contains an ingredient they wish to avoid. Parabens are usually easy to identify by their name, such as methylparaben, propylparaben, butylparaben, or ethylparaben.
Does FDA regulate the use of preservatives in cosmetics?
FDA doesn’t have special rules that apply only to preservatives in cosmetics. The law treats preservatives in cosmetics the same as other cosmetic ingredients.
Under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FD&C Act), cosmetic products and ingredients, other than color additives, do not need FDA approval before they go on the market.
However, it is against the law to market a cosmetic in interstate commerce if it is adulterated or misbranded. This means, for example, that cosmetics must be safe for consumers when used according to directions on the label or in the customary way, and they must be properly labeled.
FDA can take action against a cosmetic on the market that does not comply with the laws we enforce. However, to take action against a cosmetic for safety reasons, we must have reliable scientific information showing that the product is harmful when consumers use it according to directions on the label or in the customary way.
For more on this subject, see 
FDA Authority Over Cosmetics
Key Legal Concepts: "Interstate Commerce," "Adulterated," and "Misbranded
Prohibited and Restricted Ingredients
Are parabens safe as they’re used in cosmetics? Are they linked to breast cancer or other health problems?
FDA scientists continue to review published studies on the safety of parabens. At this time, we do not have information showing that parabens as they are used in cosmetics have an effect on human health. Here are some of the questions we are considering:
What do published studies show about the possible hazards of parabens, and on the effects of parabens on human health? For example, do experimental findings with various parabens also happen in real life?
What are the hazards and risks of not using parabens? If we stop using parabens to protect cosmetics and consumers from harmful bacteria, are there safer alternatives for preservatives?
If there are paraben-related health effects that are scientifically supported and documented, how do these effects relate to the use of parabens in cosmetics?
Do the different kinds of parabens act the same or differently in our bodies?
FDA will continue to evaluate new data in this area. If we determine that a health hazard exists, we will advise the industry and the public, and will consider the agency’s legal options under the authority of the FD&C Act to protect the health and welfare of consumers.
Additional Resources
How FDA Evaluates Regulated Products: Cosmetics
Microbiological Methods for Cosmetics 
Shelf Life/Expiration Dating
Bad Reaction to Cosmetics? Tell FDA










Content current as of:
02/25/2022






Regulated Product(s)

Cosmetics















                                        Cosmetic Ingredients
                      



Allergens in Cosmetics
Alpha Hydroxy Acids
Beta Hydroxy Acids
Diethanolamine
Fragrances in Cosmetics
Latex in Cosmetics
Parabens in Cosmetics
Per and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS) in Cosmetics
Phthalates in Cosmetics
Talc















 






Footer Links



FDA Archive
About FDA
Accessibility




Visitor Information 
Website Policies / Privacy
No FEAR Act
Vulnerability Disclosure Policy




FOIA
HHS.gov
USA.gov






Contact FDA


Follow FDA on Facebook




Follow FDA on Twitter




Follow FDA on Instagram





Follow FDA on LinkedIn




View FDA videos on YouTube




Subscribe to FDA RSS feeds





FDA Homepage



 
Contact Number
      1-888-INFO-FDA (1-888-463-6332)
    




Back to Top





