Document Name: role of Carbopol 934 in Eye Cream3
Document link: https://www.truthinaging.com/ingredients/carbomer




Carbomer
































































































 



JavaScript seems to be disabled in your browser.
                    You must have JavaScript enabled in your browser to utilize the functionality of this website.                






Free shipping on all domestic orders over $49
Truth Vitality









Sign Up






Subscribe to our mailing list
* indicates required

Email Address  *



First Name 





 

Sign Up












Login






























The honest truth about beauty & personal care products










Home


 Reviews


 Ingredients


 Community



 Get Involved Today



 Our Story











Home


 Reviews


 Ingredients


 Community



 Get Involved



 Our Story


 





Open subcategory
Close subcategory



























Home


Ingredients


Carbomer

















Carbomer
* A series of synthetic polymers primarily made from acrylic acid. The come in the form of white, fluffy powders.


Carbomers are thickening agents that help control the viscosity and flow of cosmetic products. They also help distribute and suspend insoluble solids into liquid, and prevent the oil and liquid parts of a solution from separating. They have the ability to absorb and retain water, and can swell up to 1000 times their original volume when dispersed in water.  Generally, this class of ingredients is used in gel-like formulations because it forms a colloidal, mucilage-like consistency when mixed in water. On a cosmetic ingredient list, the name carbomeris sometimes associated with a number such as 910, 934, 940, 941 and 934P. These numbers simply represent the specific molecular weight and compositions of the polymer. This ingredient is contained in a wide range of personal care products such as styling gel, facial moisturizer, sunscreen, shampoo, anti-aging treatment, eye cream, cleanser and scrubs.







* A series of synthetic polymers primarily made from acrylic acid. The come in the form of white, fluffy powders.  Functions:  Carbomers are thickening agents that help control the viscosity and flow of cosmetic products. They also help distribute and suspend insoluble solids into liquid, and prevent the oil and liquid parts of a solution from separating. They have the ability to absorb and retain water, and can swell up to 1000 times their original volume when dispersed in water.  Generally, this class of ingredients is used in gel-like formulations because it forms a colloidal, mucilage-like consistency when mixed in water. On a cosmetic ingredient list, the name carbomeris sometimes associated with a number such as 910, 934, 940, 941 and 934P. These numbers simply represent the specific molecular weight and compositions of the polymer. This ingredient is contained in a wide range of personal care products such as styling gel, facial moisturizer, sunscreen, shampoo, anti-aging treatment, eye cream, cleanser and scrubs.  Safety Measures/Side Effects:  The Cosmetic Ingredient Review (CIR) Expert Panel has assessed this ingredient as safe to use in cosmetic products. In reviewing acute oral and dermal studies, they determined that carbomers have a low potential for phototoxicity, photo-contact allergenicity, skin irritation and sensitization at concentrations up to 100%.  Recommended Products with Carbomer:
E'shee Clinical Esthetic Elixir of Life KI Therapy Serum ($189 in the shop); Your Best Face Correct ($150 in the shop) 
As much as possible, products in the Truth In Aging shop are chosen for their safety profile as well as effectiveness. 


Become a member to read this article in full

Your membership includes:

Full Site-Wide Access - to all articles, reviews, features + ingredient research
Exclusive Access - spa services, treatments, life coaches + MORE
Cosmetic Concierge - personal consultations with Marta
Early Access - to new product launches
First to Know - about new ingredients + innovative products
Bonus Rewards + Gifts
Exclusive Offers + Deals
Expedited Shipping

Become a member





Become a member to Access More







Don’t Miss a Day to slay



                                    Your anti-aging regimen can't wait!
                                    Get full access to articles, and our skincare library including our ingredients database. Plus gain personal, expert skincare consultations from Marta, lots of free swag and MORE!
                                
Join and learn more about our platinum, gold, and silver memberships.
While you're deciding, enjoy a 2-week trial for subscribing to our newsletter, plus enjoy our Top 8 Anti-Aging Essentials.
Become a member











Sign up for our newsletter to
               get latest product reviews and
               Save 10%  on all orders over $50
          










Subscribe to our mailing list
* indicates required

Email Address  *



First Name 





 

Sign Up












Did you find this article useful?

yes
            -or-
            no



1
                















Products with Carbomer









Related Articles




 

Reviewed and recommended: Derm...
There is nothing like a presidential election for testing ou...


Read more


 

Dermalogica Daily Defense Bloc...


I have to admit I was scared into using SPF on a daily b...


Read more


More Articles: 

                                    Reader Review: My Blend Day Creme 08                                

 






Compare Products                    


You have no items to compare.













Truth In Aging's Five Best
The very best to choose from for your skin concerns.
Read More







Truth In Aging Videos
Helpful how-tos and reviews from Marta and friends.
Watch Now







Meet Our Contributors
The TIA community consists of our trusted reviewers.
Meet Them


 



Be Inspired
Inspiring thoughts and women who are aging gracefully.
Read More


 









Earn Rewards, get samples, Sign up and SAVE today











*Email:



Name




Sign Up







































HOME
REVIEW
INGREDIENTS
COMMUNITY
SHOP


OUR STORY
TRUTH VITALITY
CONTACT
FAQ
MEDIA




As featured in























©2020 truthinaging.com







Terms of Use


Privacy Policy


Shipping Policy


Returns policy


RSS




































   Loading...    



 

















Sign Up & Save! Take 10% off ALL your orders over $50!

















Sign Up
















