Document Name: role of Softisan 649 (Bis-Diglyceryl Polyacryladipate-1) in Cream3
Document link: https://cosmetics.specialchem.com/inci-ingredients/bis-diglyceryl-polyacyladipate-2









BIS-DIGLYCERYL POLYACYLADIPATE-2 - Cosmetics Ingredient INCI












































The material selection platform 
Cosmetics Ingredients





































OK


 


The material selection platform 
 Cosmetics Ingredients









Welcome back, 
My Profile
My Subscriptions
My Courses & Tutorials

Logout






Subscribe to Newsletters  Login / Register













The material selection platform 

Cosmetics Ingredients

















Ingredients Selector




Selection Resources




News and Feeds



SEARCH








OK












Home
INCI Directory





Share






















Share



















BIS-DIGLYCERYL POLYACYLADIPATE-2



CAS Number

82249-33-0



Chem/IUPAC Name:

Bis[3-[2,3-di(octanoyloxy)propoxy]-2-octanoyloxypropyl] hexanedioate



EINECS/ELINCS No:

406-144-4



COSING REF No:

74501










Bis-diglyceryl polyacyladipate-2 is a semi-solid emollient. It is valued for its high water-binding properties, excellent adhesion to the skin and glossy finish. Though it is sometimes contained in cosmetic products such as moisturizer and hair dye, this ingredient is most often used in lip products such as lip gloss, lip balm, lip plumper and lipstick. Its molecular formula is C66H118O18 and molecular weight is 1199.6.



 Who supplies BIS-DIGLYCERYL POLYACYLADIPATE-2 ?


 KahlWax

 See all products 



 Industrial Quimica Lasem S.A.U

 See all products 



 Vantage

 See all products 



 IOI Oleo

 See all products 





 View All Suppliers 




What is BIS-DIGLYCERYL POLYACYLADIPATE-2 used for?

 Due to its function as an emollient, it is used in multiple personal care products such as in leave-on: lipstick, lip balm, lip gloss, eye shadow, lip liner, lip plumper, lip balm with SPF, foundation, bronzer/highlighter, blush, brow, liner, concealer, eye liner, mascara, makeup primer, moisturizer, BB cream, daily use with SPF, facial powder, around-eye cream, glitter, anti-aging, beard care, after sun product, cuticle treatment, body powder, facial, and in rinse-off products like eye makeup remover, exfoliant/scrub, facial cleanser. For hair care, it benefits extend for use in hair styling aide, styling gel/lotion, mask, setting powder/spray, hair treatments, serums & essences.



Origin

Bis-diglyceryl polyacyladipate-2 is manufactured in 1-pot reactions with heat, catalysts, and reduced pressure. The raw materials used in the production of this ester is diglycerin, adipic acid, isostearic acid, 12-hydroxystearic acid, n-octanoic acid, and n-decanoic acid. Stearic acid is also a raw material for the production of bis-diglyceryl polyacyladipate-2.



What does BIS-DIGLYCERYL POLYACYLADIPATE-2 do in a formulation?


Emollient
Skin conditioning




Safety Profile of BIS-DIGLYCERYL POLYACYLADIPATE-2

Bis-diglyceryl polyacyladipate-2 is not acute or reproductive toxicant, it is not genotoxic, and not dermal irritant/sensitizer. The Cosmetic Ingredient Review (CIR) Expert Panel recognized that data gaps remained regarding toxicokinetics and carcinogenicity data. Bis-diglyceryl polyacyladipate-2 is used mostly in leave-on dermal applications, and is large, highly lipid-soluble compound that is not expected to efficiently pass through the stratum corneum of the skin. As noted, even if it was to penetrate the skin, the constituent compound does not present a toxicological concern based on the available toxicity data.



BIS-DIGLYCERYL POLYACYLADIPATE-2 Alternatives


LANOLIN




BIS-DIGLYCERYL POLYACYLADIPATE-2 Technical profile





Property
Values


Specific Gravity
Approx. 0.96 g/mL (40°C)



Melting Point

35°C




Acid Value

Max. 2 mg KOH/g



Solubility

Soluble in diethylether, hexane, benzene, and hot ethanol
Miscible with fats, oils, and paraffin hydrocarbons









 5
Commercial Selection : Grades containing solely BIS-DIGLYCERYL POLYACYLADIPATE-2







Search by keywords 









Origin/Nature



Synthetic (1)




Vegetable extracts (3)







Regulation & Certification


Ecocert (2)














REFINE YOUR SEARCH
( active filters)








5 Products Found



Commercial Grades
Suppliers
Docs & Support


Emolid BDGA



 
Industrial Quimica Lasem S.A.U
 




1





SOFTISAN® 649



 
IOI Oleo
 








Kahlwax 6421 - Supersoft Ester



 
KahlWax
 







Kahlbase 6417 - Lipstick Base



 
KahlWax
 








Liponate™ BDP



 
Vantage
 













5 Products matching your search





8

FORMULATIONS with BIS-DIGLYCERYL POLYACYLADIPATE-2







pdf
125 Kb



Decorative Cosmetics: Natural glow lip oil by Brenntag Specialties
This Natural glow lip oil nourishes lips and provides shine. It features:
STEPAN-MILD® L3-G/MB: which is a natural emollient with a light after feel. It helps to reduce stickiness.
Cos Black Carrot Fiber M: which is a natural pigment that gives this lip oil a pinch of red color to create a perfect natural look.
A formulation by Brenntag Specialties.














pdf
181 Kb



Decorative Cosmetics: Matte Lipstick by Paramelt
This Matte Lipstick is a combination of 3 waxes which offer a good basis as a universal wax package for lipstick formulations. It features:
Paracera® N 101: which is very effective for increasing temperature stability at significantly lower dosage levels than conventional melting point boosters, without compromising on pay off and stick hardness. It possesses a narrow molecular weight distribution which enhances oil gelation & stability, modifies rheology, imparts gloss, and improves structuring in sticks.
Paracera® H & Paracera® MW: which impart flexibility, desired skin feel, and improve spreadability & oil binding properties. They provide compatibility to a variety of oils and pigments in the formulation.
A formulation by Paramelt.














pdf
88 Kb



Skin Care: Protective Cream for Frosty Temperatures by IOI Oleo
This cream nourishes your skin, no matter how cold it is outside. Due to the innovative combination of
IMWITOR® 600 and IMWITOR® 948, this protective cream stays soft and is easy to apply.
A formulation by IOI Oleo.














pdf
89 Kb



Skin Care: Massage Candle by IOI Oleo
100% natural formulation, preservative-free.
SOFTISAN® 100 and SOFTISAN® 142 control the melting behavior (melting point of circa 32°C and 42°C respectively) of the candle. Unlike waxes, they are triglycerides with a very pleasant skin feel when molten.
SOFTISAN® 649 increases application time of the liquid massage components.
MIGLYOL® OE enables high spreadability and non-sticky character of the product.
A formulation by IOI Oleo.














pdf
87 Kb



Decorative Cosmetics: Kiss My Lips by IOI Oleo
This lip care formulations features:
SOFTIGEN® PURA is the vegetable alternative to Petrolatum, improving protection of the skin 
MIGLYOL® Gel B
enhances the heat stability and application properties of Lip Balms and Sticks
SOFTISAN® 649 enhances long-lasting properties and water resistance of the final product
A formulation by IOI Oleo.










Login to view all 8 Formulations containing BIS-DIGLYCERYL POLYACYLADIPATE-2






Login

No Account yet? Register for freeForgot Password ?






























Quick Navigation


Marketing solutions
Online courses
Program analytics
Become an expert
About us
Careers
Contact us





Stay connected

Subscribe to our Newsletters
Subscribe



Follow us  on LinkedIn
Follow us  on Twitter
Subscribe to our  Youtube channel



Industries Served







Plastics Elastomers








Coatings Ingredients








Adhesives Ingredients








Cosmetics Ingredients








Polymer Additives











Copyright © SpecialChem 2023
Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy Cookie Policy






Back to Top



  



