Document Name: role of Phenyl Dimethicone in Protective Cream4
Document link: https://www.atamanchemicals.com/phenyl-trimethicone_u26114/



















PHENYL TRIMETHICONE - Ataman Kimya















+90 216 577 10 10
info@atamanchemicals.com


KVKK Politikası
Information Society Services
Human Resources











PRODUCTS











Categories

Detergents, Cosmetics, Disinfectants, Pharmaceutical Chemicals
Water Treatment, Metal and Mining Chemicals
Paint, Construction, Plastics, Rubber Chemicals
Textile, Leather, Paper and Industrial Chemicals
Crop Protection, Food, Feed and Flavor Chemicals
Other Industries







NEWS


CORPORATE


CONTACT

















Quick Search



















PRODUCTS





PRODUCTS
Detergents, Cosmetics, Disinfectants, Pharmaceutical Chemicals
PHENYL TRIMETHICONE
Return to Product List




1-9
A-D
E-G
H-M
N-P
Q-S
T-Z



PHENYL TRIMETHICONE





Phenyl Trimethicone = Tris (trimethylsiloxy) phenylsilane
CAS Number: 2116-84-9
EC number : 218-320-6
Silicone based. Phenyl Trimethicone is used as an antifoaming agent, hair care agent and skin care agent in cosmetics and beauty products.
Phenyl Trimethicone improves the texture of hair damaged by chemical treatment.
PHENYL TRIMETHICON is classified as:
Anti-FoamingHair conditioningSkin conditioning
CAS Number 2116-84-9
EINECS/ELINCS No: 218-320-6COSING
REF No: 79701
Chem/IUPAC Name: 1,1,5,5,5-Hexamethyl-3-phenyl-3-[(trimethylsilyl)oxy]trisiloxane
antifoam agent, hair care agent, skin care agent - occlusive, antifoam, hair care and skin care
What is Phenyl Trimethicone?
Phenyl trimethicone is a type of silicone used in cosmetic and skin care products to help improve the texture and spreadability of formulations. Phenyl Trimethicone also helps to trap moisture in the skin and gives your skin a moist and moist appearance.
Phenyl trimethicone, also known as Phenyl Trimethicone, is a silicone fluid. Silicones are synthetic components with a backbone of repeating siloxane units, the basic being silicon and oxygen.
Silicones may also be called polysiloxanes.
Often times, the terms 'silicone' and 'silicone' are mistakenly used interchangeably when they are actually quite different.
Silicon is the 14th element in the periodic table and the second most abundant element in the earth's crust after oxygen.
In contrast, silicones are always produced synthetically.
DISTRIBUTION
Phenyl Trimethicone: Phenyl trimethicone is used to help improve a product's texture and spreadability. Phenyl Trimethicone also provides some additional benefits for the skin by helping to retain moisture in the upper layers of the skin, helping the skin appear more hydrated. NOT THAT GOOD: Silicones are non-allergenic and do not directly irritate the skin.
Who is Phenyl Trimethicone for?
All skin types except those with identified allergies.
SYNERGIC COMPONENTS: Works well with most materials
Why is Phenyl Trimethicone Used?
As a class, silicones improve the feel, look and performance of skincare and cosmetic formulations.
Silicones such as phenyl trimethicone are used in moisturizers, foundations, conditioners, and concealers to provide smooth application and reduced friction.
Silicones can help with skin redness and irritation due to their low surface tension, which allows them to spread easily on the skin surface and form a protective barrier.
Tissue
Phenyl trimethicone is often used to improve the texture of a product.
Phenyl Trimethicone contributes to a product's silky feel on the skin and reduces stickiness and stickiness in creams and lotions.
In addition, phenyl trimethicone ensures an even distribution of active ingredients on the skin surface.
Phenyl trimethicone has a drier finish than dimethicone, another common silicone used in skin care products, making it great for formulations that are not meant to be sticky or sticky.
A polyphenylmethylsiloxane for use in skin care, sun care, color cosmetics, hair care and antiperspirant/deodorant applications.
INCI Name: Phenyl Trimethicone
Uses: Used as a water-repellent additive and to reduce the stickiness and tackiness of organic ingredients in formulations such as: Skin lotions and creams Sunscreens and non-aerosol sprays Pre-shave lotions Non-aerosol hair shines for hair sprays, conditioners and conditioning aids
Phenyl Trimethicone Benefits:
Flash Point, Closed Cup: > 100 °C
Kinetic / Kinematic Viscosity: 22.5
SantistokMaterial Type: Special Fluid
Moistening
Phenyl trimethicone is also used as a skin and hair care agent due to its ability to increase hydration.
Phenyl Trimethicone spreads easily on the skin and hair, forming a non-oily and non-sticky invisible film that prevents moisture loss from the surface.
This film allows oxygen, nitrogen and other important nutrients to pass through but prevents water from evaporating.
Ultimately, this results in moist and smooth skin and hair.
The film of phenyl trimethicone not only protects the skin from moisture loss, but also prevents moisture from penetrating.
This feature is useful for the formulation of sun protection products.
Additionally, phenyl trimethicone can help dissolve UV filters and increase a product's sun protection factor, or SPF.
The final function of phenyl trimethicone is as an antifoaming agent.
The Phenyl Trimethicone component has the ability to prevent foam formation even if the product is shaken.
What Is The Controversy Over Phenyl Trimethicone?
There is some controversy surrounding silicones as a class of components.
Although safe to use, there are some claims that silicones cause immune problems, sensitize and suffocate the skin.
However, these claims have not been proven in any published research.
To refute these false claims, it is important to first understand that the large molecular size of silicones prevents them from being absorbed by the skin.
If a substance cannot penetrate the skin, it cannot react with the cells of the immune system.
Therefore, silicones are not allergenic.
Additionally, claims that silicones can bioaccumulate or accumulate in our bodies are also false.
Once again, this is because their large size prevents them from penetrating the skin.
If silicones cannot penetrate the skin, they certainly cannot pass through cell membranes, which is an essential requirement for bioaccumulation.
Finally, it would be wrong to say that the film made of silicone somehow 'suffocates' the skin.
As mentioned above, the soft, invisible film that phenyl trimethicone and other silicones form after topical application allows oxygen and other gases to pass through.
In addition, the film does not prevent the natural secretion of the skin.
Therefore, the skin can still 'breathe' after topical application of a silicone-containing product.
Is Phenyl Trimethicone Safe?
The safety of phenyl trimethicone has been evaluated by the Cosmetic Ingredient Review Expert Panel.
The Phenyl Trimethicone Panel evaluated the scientific data and concluded that phenyl trimethicone is safe for use in cosmetic and personal care products.
A silicone fluid that gives formulas a non-oily, easy-to-spray emollient.
Phenyl Trimethicone is also used as a water-repellent additive and to reduce the tackiness and stickiness of other ingredients.
Phenyl Trimethicone also adds shine, softness and better manageability to the hair.
What is Phenyl Trimethicone?
Phenyl Trimethicone is a white, silicone liquid.
In cosmetics and personal care products, Phenyl Trimethicone is used in the formulation of a wide variety of products.
Why is it used in cosmetics and personal care products?
Phenyl Trimethicone reduces the tendency of finished products to foam when shaken.
Phenyl Trimethicone also improves the look and feel of hair by increasing hair body, elasticity or shine, or improving the texture of physically or chemically damaged hair. treatment. Phenyl Trimethicone slows down water loss from the skin by forming a barrier on the skin surface.
Phenyl Trimethicone is a derivative of silica or silcion and is used as an antifoaming agent, hair care agent and skin care agent in cosmetic and beauty products.
Phenyl Trimethicone reduces the tendency of formulas to foam when shaken and improves the texture of chemically damaged hair, increasing hair body, elasticity and shine.
Functions:
Phenyl Trimethicone is a derivative of silica or silcion and is used in cosmetic and beauty products as an antifoaming agent, hair care agent and skin care agent (Cosmetic Database).
Phenyl Trimethicone reduces the tendency of formulas to foam when shaken and improves the texture of chemically damaged hair, increasing hair body, elasticity and shine.
Phenyl Trimethicone provides heat resistance as well as non-oily "softening and anti-whitening properties in antiperspirants" (National Institutes of Health) in hair care applications.
Phenyl Trimethicone also creates a barrier on the skin surface, slowing the loss of water from the skin.
Safety Precautions/Side Effects:
Phenyl Trimethicone is considered a safe ingredient; The Cosmetics Database considers this a low hazard and is CIR-certified, although data gaps have been noted.
Phenyl Trimethicone is generally considered safe when applied topically in hair care and skin care products, although silicone compounds can be toxic when ingested (and in some cases injected) and have been shown to cause allergic reactions in some studies.
Functions of Phenyl Trimethicone (INCI)
Defoamer: Suppresses foam during production / reduces foam in liquid finished products
Conditioner: Leaves hair easy to comb, supple, soft and shiny and/or gives volume, lightness and shine
Skin care ingredient: Keeps skin in good condition
Origin(s): Synthetique
Nom INCI : PHENYL TRIMETHICONEN°
EINECS/ELINCS : 218-320-6Classification : Silicone
Sunoit Code: SNY-250
Viscosity, cst,25 ℃ 18~27
Type: phenylsilicon
Application: Skin care, sun care, rabbit care and color cosmetics.
Description: SNY-250 is a phenyl modified trimethicone, soluble with ethanol and mineral. oils. Phenyl Trimethicone has excellent properties such as oxidation resistance, UV resistant, gas permeability, excellent softness and smoothness.
Product description
Phenyl Trimethicone
SNY-250 is a phenyl modified trimethicone, soluble in ethanol and mineral oils.
Phenyl Trimethicone has the characteristics of oxidation resistance, UV resistant, gas permeability, excellent softness and smoothness, etc. It has excellent features such as
Phenyl Trimethicone can be used in formulations to enhance the functions of cosmetic ingredients, and also waterproof additive can be used to reduce the viscosity of the formulation.
Skin care cream/lotion, shaving cream etc. can be used in products. Phenyl Trimethicone is also an ideal ingredient for enhancing the shine of hair care products.
Features
• Excellent silky feel and hydrophobic ability
• Excellent hydrophobic and gas permeable properties
• Good compatibility with organic solventApplication
Skin care, sun care, rabbit care and color cosmetics.
What is phenyl trimethicone?
Phenyltrimethicone is a silicone-based compound, also called polyphenylmethyl siloxane. Polysiloxane is usually nothing but derivatives of silica, naturally occurring in silica or quartz/opal and found in the earth's crust. Phenyl Trimethicone is a white, silicone liquid in physical appearance.
Usage and Benefits:
Phenyltrimethicone is used as a skin and hair conditioning agent, similar to other polysiloxanes.
It is known that silicones spread the product easily on the skin surface and form an invisible protective cover on it.
This film allows moisture to be retained in the skin while other atoms such as nitrogen or oxygen can pass through.
Therefore, it is particularly beneficial for dry skin, as the skin remains moist and well-groomed.
The protective coating also keeps irritants away, resulting in a significant reduction in skin redness, irritation and inflammation.
Phenyl Trimethicone also acts as an antifoaming agent.
Phenyl Trimethicone is very important as it can form foam when the product is shaken while being transported from one place to another and this trapped air can affect the stability of the product.
In other words, when Phenyl trimethicone is used, it prevents foam formation while the product is shaken.
Phenyl Trimethicone is used in the formulations of shampoos, conditioners, creams, lotions, moisturizers and other personal care products.
Brand Resil
Form Type LiquidUse/ApplicationPersonal Care Origin India
Molecular Formula C15H32O3Si4
PubChem CID 62427
Molecular Weight 372.75 g/mol
Product description
Phenyl Trimethicone is a white, silicone liquid. Phenyl Trimethicone is used in the formulation of a wide variety of products in cosmetics and personal care products.

The Phenyl Trimethicone component is a water-insoluble silicone that we use at a very low level to prevent any buildup.
This high performance multitasker is used to provide shine, softness, easy detangling and color protection.
As part of our mission to provide the greenest formulas possible, we are working hard to remove this ingredient from our portfolio.
Phenyl Trimethicone Market: overview
Phenyl Trimethicone is a unique silicone formulation used exclusively as an antifoaming agent, sunscreen ingredient, texture improver and conditioning agent in cosmetics and personal care products.
Phenyl Trimethicone is also known as polyphenylmethylsiloxane silicone fluid.
Phenyl Trimethicone is a colorless liquid at room temperature and has optical properties similar to hair.
Phenyl Trimethicone has passed various toxicology tests and is recognized as safe for use in Cosmetic products by the Cosmetic Ingredient Review (CIR) expert panel.
Phenyl Trimethicone Market: Dynamics
Phenyl Trimethicone is mainly used in Hair Care products due to its unique properties.
Phenyl Trimethicone improves the hair texture, that is, makes the hair silky, increases the shine of the hair and provides a well-groomed appearance.
This property is widely applicable in hair sprays. The enhanced texture effect is easily noticeable on chemically damaged hair.
Increasing lifestyles and desire for beautiful hair appearance among young people has increased the consumption of Phenyl Trimethicone-based hair care products and therefore Phenyl Trimethicone.
In addition, manufacturers prefer phenyl trimethicone over other alternatives as it also acts as an antifoaming agent and restricts foam formation even during agitation. This ensures Phenyl Trimethicone's dominance in hair care products.
Phenyl trimethicone is an excellent conditioning agent for both hair and skin.
When Phenyl Trimethicone is spread on the hair and skin, it forms an oily and non-sticky film and prevents moisture loss from the surface.
Its use in non-washable air conditioners can be attributed to this unique feature.
It is combined with UV filters to increase SPF in thermal protection products.
Although phenyl trimethicone is water repellent, it can be easily washed off with shampoos containing Lauryl sulfate.
Phenyl trimethicone is often included in the composition of antiperspirants to prevent the formation of white spots.
Thanks to these exceptional properties and its multi-component role in personal care products, phenyl trimethicone remains strong in the market and demand is expected to remain high during the forecast period.
Since phenyl trimethicone is a silicone fluid, it has been the subject of many rumors in the market.
For example, there are claims that silicones as a class can worsen skin problems and suffocate the skin and cause sensitivity.
Another such rumor on the market is that silicones bioaccumulate in the body.
However, these rumors were also disproved by experts with appropriate explanations and data that silicones could not pass through cell membranes.
Phenyl Trimethicone: Regional Outlook
The Asia-Pacific region is expected to continue to be the leading consumer of Phenyl trimethicone in the long-term forecast.
This growth can be attributed to increased consumer purchasing power, the rise of the middle class, and increased per capita spending on personal care products in the region.
The South Asian region is expected to witness high growth for phenyl trimethicone in the region.
With major production bases for phenyl trimethicone in the European and North American regions, the market in these regions is expected to remain export-oriented with little change in consumption pattern.
The Latin America and Middle East Africa region is also expected to witness fair growth in long-term forecasts and remain markets for imports.
Pearl name: Phenyl trimethicone
French name: Phenyl trimethiconeCAS number.: 2116-84-9EC number.: 218-320-6Other names: Phenyl trimethicone
Improves the performance of many types of cosmetic formulations.
Phenyl Trimethicone has excellent solubility in alcohol. Phenyl Trimethicone provides an oil-free, easy-to-spread emollient and allows the skin to sweat naturally through a soft, invisible film. Phenyl Trimethicone has good anti-adhesive and anti-adhesive properties and adds shine, softness and better manageability to the hair.
Phenyl Trimethicone can be used as a water-repellent additive and to reduce the stickiness and stickiness of organic ingredients in formulations such as: as a hair brightening agent in skin lotions and creams, suntan lotions and sprays, pre-shave lotions and hair sprays, conditioners, and conditioning aids.
Silicone Polish (Phenyl Trimethicone) has a high gloss and shine.
It has a light texture like cyclomethicone, but it is non-volatile, odorless, shiny. It is suitable for use in formulas that require the shine of all the formula. and shines when applied to skin or hair
Examples of products suitable for using Silicone Shine Hair Spray (giving shine to hair)
1-20% Sunscreen Lotion/Cream 2-10%Hair Serum (preserves the shine of the hair) 1-20% Lipsticks (shine, shine) 1 -3% General Cream and Lotion (shiny, soft, smooth) 2-5% BB, CC Cream that needs shine on the skin 2-10% Use if you do not want extra shine. Cyclomethicone or Dimethicone instead to save on recipe costs.
Dissolution properties:
Silicone Shine can be directly dissolved in these ingredients.
Usage: For all products that want softness, lightness and shine.
Mixing method: Mix the silicone or oil part before sticking to the formula. Usage rate: 1-50% Product features: Clear liquid, light texture (thickness at 15 mPa.s)
Solubility: Soluble oils in silicone and various substances. (Please see more solubility details above) Storage: can be stored at room temperature But cap the bottle tightly. and the shelf life of the product protected from sunlight or heat is at least 2 years
INCI Name : Phenyl Trimethicone
Definition:
Phenyl Trimethicone improves the performance of many types of cosmetic formulations.
Phenyl Trimethicone has excellent solubility in alcohol. Phenyl Trimethicone is easily emulsified, resistant to oxidation and has good compatibility with cosmetic ingredients. Phenyl Trimethicone is non-oily and allows the skin to sweat naturally through a soft, invisible film.
Phenyl Trimethicone has good anti-adhesive properties and adds shine, softness and better manageability to the hair.
Applications:
It is used as a water-repellent additive in formulations such as skin lotions and creams, sun tanning products and pre-shave lotions, and to reduce the stickiness and stickiness of organic ingredients.
It is used as a hair brightener in hair sprays, conditioners and care aids.
Phenyl forms a substituted silicone fluid and combines perfectly with different organic ingredients of cosmetic products. water repellent properties.
Phenyltrimethicone, also known as DC 556, is a versatile silicone for many different types of lotions, creams, sunscreens, hair glosses, styling products, and conditioners.
It is an emollient that spreads easily and allows the skin to perspire. Phenyl Trimethicone adds shine, softness and better manageability to the hair.
Phenyl Trimethicone can reduce the stickiness and stickiness of organic ingredients in many different formulations;
Hair care – Shampoos, Conditioners and Styling, Conditioners and detangling products
Hair care – For Styling/Hairsprays and Gloss/ultra-shiny products
Definition
SF1550 is a phenyl substituted silicone fluid compatible with organic substances used in personal care products. It provides shine and shine in hair care products, softness and water repellency in skin care products, detackification in cosmetic products.
Key Features and Typical Benefits
Shine, shine and heat resistance in hair care applications. Oil-free emollient and anti-whitening properties in antiperspirants. Soft and smooth feel while acting as a water barrier in skin care applications. Stickiness and softening in cosmetic products.
Silicone Solids, 100%
Viscosity @ 25°C (77°F), cSt. 15 - 30
Specific Gravity 0.97 - 0.99
Color, APHA
Max 15
Appearance Clear LiquidFlash point min., °C (°F) 123 (254)
Index of Refractive, 25°C (77°F) 1.45 to 1.47
Turbidity, (ntu) 5 Max.
BRB PTM 20 is a phenyl liquid compatible with organic compounds.
Phenyl Trimethicone enhances shine and shine in different types of applications, including hair care, skin care, sun care and color cosmetics.
APPLICATIONS As a water-repellent additive and in formulations such as
Used to reduce the stickiness and stickiness of organic ingredients: skin lotions and creams
Sun lotions and non-aerosol sprays
pre-shave lotions
It is used in non-aerosol hair sprays as a hair gloss, emollient and conditioning aid.
TYPICAL CHARACTERISTICS Specification Authors: These values are not intended for use in the preparation of specifications. Please contact your local Dow Corning sales office or GlobalDow Corning Contact before posting specifications for this product.
Definition
Phenyl Trimethicone is a phenyl substituted silicone fluid for use in surface polishes, emollients and leather underlay treatment.
Product features
Excellent compatibility with organic material. Low residue. High refractive index.
Applications
BC 98/073 imparts a high gloss to products such as tire enhancers, lacquers and leather treatments and has a higher refractive index than standard polydimethylsiloxanes.
Toxicity and Use
See our material safety data sheet for more information.
Storage and Shelf Life
The product should be stored below 32ºC and should not be allowed to freeze. The shelf life of the unopened package is 24 months from the date of production. If you want to use the product after this period, please contact us for confirmation.
MOLECULAR WEIGHT: 372.75EINECS: 218-320-6
INCHI: 1S/C15H32O3Si4/c1-19(2,3)16-22(17-20(4,5)6.18-21(7,8)9)15 -13-11-10-12-14- 15/h10-14H,1-9H3
INCHIKEY: 1LINXHFKHZLOLEI-UHFFFAOYSA-
MIXING POINT: -102°C
FLASH POINT: 127°
BOILING POINT: 264°
CREFRACTIVE INDEX: 1.437
DENSITY: 20° at 0.921 g/mL
CNOTESPhenyl trimethicone is a Phenyl substituted silicone fluid.
Phenyl trimethicone uses and applications include:
Hair conditioner; oil phase component;
hydrophobic agent;
lubricant; solvent;
antifoam, antistat, emollient, anti-adhesive in cosmetics;
emollient, water repellent in skin care products;
shine aid in hair care;
emollient, conditioner, film former in pharmaceuticals;
lubricant, compatibilizer for silicones and hydrocarbons;
silylating agent;
primers, especially binder for facade cladding;
antiperspirants;
thread lubricant;
in food packaging adhesives; release agent in food contact coatings
Recommended storage of phenyl trimethicone: Moisture sensitive; hold under argon
CLASSSolver
FUNCTIONS: Antiperspirant, Lubricant
INDUSTRYCosmetics: Pharmaceuticals, Adhesives, Organics
Phenyl trimethicone can add shine and shine to products, provides non-oily, easy-to-spray emollient and allows the skin to naturally perspire through a soft, invisible film, good water repellency and reduction of stickiness and stickiness caused by other ingredients in formulations.
Phenyl Trimethicone can be used in all cosmetic formulations:
★ Skin Creams and lotions 
★ Color cosmetics
★ Antiperspirant products _ _ _ _ _
★ Sun Care products _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
★ Hair Care Products _ _ _ _ _ _
◉ INCI: Phenyl Trimethicone
◉ Recommended usage level: 1-5%
What is phenyl trimethicone?
Phenyl trimethicone is a silicone with a drier finish than dimethicone.
In skin care, it acts as an occlusive and conditioning agent that adds to a product's silky texture and feel on the skin.
Phenyl Trimethicone is one of the best silicone ingredients for those with dry skin due to its high viscosity.
Is Phenyl Trimethicone bad for hair?
Phenyl trimethicone is generally considered safe when applied topically in hair care and skin care products, although silicone compounds can be toxic when ingested (and in some cases injected) and have been shown to cause allergic reactions in some studies.
Is Phenyl Trimethicone safe in cosmetics?
Phenyl Trimethicone is not an irritant or sensitizer in humans. ...
Based on the animal and human data contained in this report, it was concluded that Phenyl Trimethicone is safe as a cosmetic ingredient in current use and concentration applications.
Is Diphenylsiloxy phenyl Trimethicone silicone?
Diphenylsiloxy Phenyl Trimethicone is a silicone compound.
What is Phenyl Trimethicone?
Silicone with a drier surface than dimethicone.
What are the other names of Phenyl Trimethicone?
PHENYL TRIMETICONE
What is Phenyl Trimethicone used for?
Functions: Phenyl Trimethicone is a derivative of silica or silcion and is used as antifoaming agent, hair care agent and skin care agent (Cosmetic Database) in cosmetic and beauty products. …
Phenyl trimethicone also slows down water loss from the skin by forming a barrier on the skin surface.
How is Phenyl Trimethicone Classified?
Silicones, Softeners
Recommendation for Phenyl Trimethicone during pregnancy and lactation
Limited data indicate no known risk
Features and Benefits:
• Easily emulsified
• Good compatibility with cosmetic ingredients
• Resistant to oxidation
• Provides non-oily, easy-to-spray emollient and allows skin to naturally perspire through a soft, invisible film
• Good adhesion and anti-adhesive properties
• Gives shine, softness and better manageability to the hair.
Application:
• Used as a water-repellent additive and to reduce the stickiness and stickiness of organic ingredients in formulations such as: o skin lotions and creams
o sunscreens and non-aerosol sprays
those pre-shave lotions
• It is used as a hair brightener.
Typical Features:
Appearance: Colorless liquid at 25ºC
Viscosity: 20mm2/s
Specific gravity: at 0.9825ºC
Refractive index: 1.46
Flash point - closed cup:>100ºC
How to use:
Phenyl trimethicone can be easily emulsified with standard emulsifiers by common techniques.
Phenyl Trimethicone is extremely soluble in 95% ethanol at room temperature. At temperatures as low as 4ºC, up to 50% by weight of this liquid can be dissolved in 95% ethanol.
This product is not recommended for use in aerosol applications.
Storage and Validity:
When stored in original unopened containers at 25ºC (77ºF) or below, this product has a useful life of 540 days from date of manufacture.
Packaging:
25kg/barrel; 50kg/drum
We are engaged in the manufacture, export and supply of excellent quality Phenyl Methyl Silicone Oil IOTA556 (Phenyl trimethicone, Cosmetic Grade Fluid) to our valued customers.
Phenyl methyl silicone oil (phenyl modified poly-siloxane) has excellent compatibility, which can improve the performance of various cosmetic formulations and has a refractive index.
Phenyl trimethicone provides an oil-free, easy-to-spread emollient and allows the skin to sweat naturally through a soft, invisible film.
It can apply cosmetic grade liquid sunscreen, makeup, skin care, hair care. Chemical Name: Poly methyl phenyl siloxane
Features:-
(1) Easily emulsified
(2) Good compatibility with cosmetic ingredients
(3) Resistant to oxidation
(4) Provides non-oily, easy-to-spread emollient and allows natural skin perspiration through a soft, invisible film
(5) good anti-adhesive and non-adhesive properties
(6) adds shine, softness and better manageability to hair
APPLICATION
(1) Used as a water-repellent additive and to reduce the stickiness and stickiness of organic compounds in formulas such as:
_skin lotions and creams
_sun lotions and sprays
_pre-shave lotions
(2) Used as a hair brightener in hair sprays, conditioners, and conditioning aids.
These values are not intended for use in the preparation of specifications.
This salt may also be used for purposes not listed in this medication guide.
Side effects
The following is a list of possible side effects that may occur in medicines that contain Phenyl Trimethicone.
This is not an exhaustive list.
These side effects are possible, but do not always occur.
Some side effects can be rare but serious.
Consult your doctor if you observe any of the following side effects, especially if they do not go away.
allergic reactions
Phenyl Trimethicone may also cause side effects not listed here.
synonyms
Silicones and siloxanes, trimethylsilyloxy phenyl, 3-aminopropyl trimethylsilyloxy, terminated trimethylsilyl;
Category
Silicone Surfactant
> Nonionic Silicone Surfactant
>> Amino group Silicone Polymer
Chemical Numbering System
CASRN: N/AEINECS: N/A
Molecular Formula and Molecular WeightMolecular Formula: N/A
Molecular Weight: N/AS
StructureFeatures
Appearance: colorless to pale yellow liquid.
Solubility Insoluble in water.
Stability is stable.
Risk Liquid form: irritation, skin, eye, respiratory system irritation
Its properties are excellent film-forming, lubricating, antistatic, dispersing, emulsifying, adsorbing, anticorrosive abilities.
The safety of phenyl trimethicone has been evaluated by the Cosmetic Ingredient Review Expert Panel.
The panel evaluated the scientific data and concluded that phenyl trimethicone is safe for use in cosmetic and personal care products.
What is Phenyl Trimethicone in skin care?
Phenyl trimethicone is a silicone with a drier finish than dimethicone.
In skin care, it acts as an occlusive and conditioning agent, adding to a product's silky texture and feel on the skin.
Phenyl Trimethicone is one of the best silicone ingredients for those with dry skin due to its high viscosity.
Is Phenyl Trimethicone the same as phenol?
Phenol is an aromatic hydrocarbon compound with the chemical formula C6H5OH whereas phenyl is a group of atoms with the formula C6H5.
Therefore, phenyl and phenol differ from each other due to the presence of an -OH group in phenol. Phenol is actually a phenyl derivative with the -OH group.
Is Phenyl Trimethicone soluble in water?
Water-soluble silicones dissolve in water and are easily washed off the hair.
Water-insoluble silicones include phenyl trimethicone, dimethicone, and cyclomethicone.
At MMF, most of our products are silicone-free.
Where does Phenyl Trimethicone come from?
Phenyl Trimethicone is a derivative of silica or silcion and is used in cosmetic and beauty products as an antifoaming agent, hair care agent and skin care agent (Cosmetic Database).
Are phenol and phenyl the same thing?
Phenol and phenyl are IUPAC names for certain chemical compounds.
Phenol is an aromatic molecule. Phenyl Trimethicone The phenyl group can be attached to a vacant spot as a side group of a molecule.
Phenyl Trimethicone The key difference between Phenol and phenyl is that phenol consists of an oxygen atom whereas phenyl does not have an oxygen atom.
What is phenyl Trimethicone in hair products?
Phenyl Trimethicone is used as an antifoaming agent, hair care agent and skin care agent in cosmetics and beauty products.
Phenyl Trimethicone improves the texture of chemically damaged hair.
What is Phenyl Trimethicone derived from?
Phenyl Trimethicone is a derivative of silica, a natural component of quartz and opal.
Why is phenyl used?
Phenyl is a powerful deodorant and germicidal to disinfect areas including hospitals, nursing homes, sewers, toilets, restrooms and barns, and is widely used for sanitation purposes.
Is trimethicone safe?
Phenyl Trimethicone is not an irritant or sensitizer in humans. Based on the animal and human data contained in this report, it was concluded that Phenyl Trimethicone is safe as a cosmetic ingredient in current use and concentration applications.
SYNONYM
1,1,5,5,5-hexamethyl-3-phenyl-3-[(trimethylsilyl)oxy]trisiloxane;
phenyl-tris(trimethylsiloxy)silane;
TRIS(TRIMETHYLSILOXY)PHENILSILAN;
1,1,1,5,5,5-Hexamethyl-3-phenyl-3-(trimethylsilyloxy)trisiloxane;
1,1,1,5,5,5-hexamethyl-3-phenyl-3-[(trimethylsilyl)oxy]-trisiloxane;
1,1,5,5,5-hexamethyl-3-phenyl-3-[(trimethylsilyl)oxy]trisiloxane; DC556; DowCorning556;
DowCorning556Fluid;
Phenyltris(trimethylsiloxy)silane;
Phenyl trimethicone; 1,1,5,5,5-Hexamethyl-3-phenyl-3-[(trimethylsilyl)oxy] trisiloxane;
Methyl phenyl polysiloxane;
Phenethyltris(trimethylsiloxy)silane;
Phenyltris(trimethylsiloxyl) silane;
Phenyl tristrimethyl siloxysilane Polyphenylmethyl siloxane;
Trisiloxane, 1,1,1,5,5,5-hexamethyl-3-phenyl-3-((trimethylsilyl)oxy)-;
Tris(trimethylsiloxy)phenylsilane

 





Share !






 

















E-NEWSLETTER
















SHORTCUTS

PRODUCTS
NEWS
CORPORATE
HUMAN RESOURCES
BLOG
CATALOG REQUEST



CONTACT

CONTACT US
SUGGESTION AND COMPLAINT
SUPPORT
KVKK POLİTİKASI




SOCIAL NETWORKS

FACEBOOK TWITTER INSTAGRAM YOUTUBE 







                2020 © All rights reserved by ATAMAN KİMYA. No content and images can be used for permission.            











1980 yılında Cengiz Tuncel, Şelale Kimya' yı devralmış ve 2006 yılında hammadde ithalatı ve ihracatı amacıyla ATAMAN Kimya Ltd' yi kurmuştur. Ataman Kimya 2009 yılında Cengiz Tuncel tarafından bir sonraki nesile devredilmiştir ve 2020 yılında ATAMAN Kimya A.Ş adını almıştır.













