Document Name: role of Tylose H20 in Cold Cream4
Document link: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carboxymethyl_cellulose




Carboxymethyl cellulose - Wikipedia




































Jump to content








Main menu





Main menu
move to sidebar
hide



		Navigation
	

Main pageContentsCurrent eventsRandom articleAbout WikipediaContact usDonate




		Contribute
	

HelpLearn to editCommunity portalRecent changesUpload file




Languages

Language links are at the top of the page across from the title.



















Search















Create accountLog in






Personal tools




 Create account Log in




		Pages for logged out editors learn more


ContributionsTalk


























Contents
move to sidebar
hide




(Top)





1Preparation


				Toggle Preparation subsection
			




1.1Structure-activity









2Uses


				Toggle Uses subsection
			




2.1Introduction







2.2Regulated therapeutic uses







2.3Enzymology







2.4Food science







2.5Specific culinary uses







2.6Medical applications







2.7Other uses









3Adverse reactions







4See also







5References







6External links












						Toggle the table of contents
					





Toggle the table of contents







Carboxymethyl cellulose




18 languages



العربيةتۆرکجهČeštinaDeutschEspañolفارسیFrançaisItalianoMagyarNederlands日本語PolskiPortuguêsRomânăРусскийSuomiУкраїнська中文
Edit links











Article

Talk







English














Read

Edit

View history









Tools





Tools
move to sidebar
hide



		Actions
	

ReadEditView history




		General
	

What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item




		Print/export
	

Download as PDFPrintable version




		In other projects
	

Wikimedia Commons




















From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia


Cellulose derivative grafted with carboxymethyl groups
This section has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)

This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources: "Carboxymethyl cellulose" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (November 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
This article's lead section contains information that is not included elsewhere in the article. If the information is appropriate for the lead of the article, this information should also be included in the body of the article. (November 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

 (Learn how and when to remove this template message)


Carboxymethyl cellulose








Names


Other names
Carboxymethylcellulose; carmellose; E466


Identifiers


CAS Number

[1] 9004-32-4[1] Y


ChEBI

CHEBI:85146 N


ChEMBL

ChEMBL1909054 N


ChemSpider

none


ECHA InfoCard

100.120.377 


E number

E466 (thickeners, ...)


UNII

05JZI7B19X N


CompTox Dashboard (EPA)

DTXSID7040441 


Properties


Chemical formula

variable 


Molar mass

variable   


Except where otherwise noted, data are given for materials in their standard state (at 25 °C [77 °F], 100 kPa).
N verify (what is YN ?)

Infobox references

Chemical compound
Carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) or cellulose gum[2] is a cellulose derivative with carboxymethyl groups (-CH2-COOH) bound to some of the hydroxyl groups of the glucopyranose monomers that make up the cellulose backbone. It is often used as its sodium salt, sodium carboxymethyl cellulose. It used to be marketed under the name Tylose, a registered trademark of SE Tylose.[3]


Preparation[edit]
Carboxymethyl cellulose is synthesized by the alkali-catalyzed reaction of cellulose with chloroacetic acid.[4]  The polar (organic acid) carboxyl groups render the cellulose soluble and chemically reactive.[5] Fabrics made of cellulose—e.g. cotton or viscose rayon—may also be converted into CMC.[citation needed]
Following the initial reaction, the resultant mixture produces approximately 60% CMC and 40% salts (sodium chloride and sodium glycolate); this product is the so-called technical CMC, which is used in detergents.[citation needed] An additional purification process is used to remove salts to produce pure CMC, which is used for alimentary and pharmaceutical applications.[citation needed] An intermediate "semi-purified" grade is also produced, typically used in paper applications such as the restoration of archival documents.[citation needed]

Structure-activity[edit]
This section has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
This section needs expansion with: a more thorough, sourced description of the variability in structure and function that are available through synthesis. You can help by adding to it.  (November 2022)

 (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
The functional properties of CMC depend on the degree of substitution of the cellulose structure [i.e., how many of the hydroxyl groups have been converted to carboxymethylene(oxy) groups in the substitution reaction], as well as the chain length of the cellulose backbone structure and the degree of clustering of the carboxymethyl substituents.[citation needed]

Uses[edit]
Introduction[edit]
CMC is used as a viscosity modifier or thickener, and to stabilize emulsions in various products, both food and non-food. It is used primarily because it has high viscosity, is nontoxic, and is generally considered to be hypoallergenic, as the major source fiber is either softwood pulp or cotton linter. Non-food products include products such as toothpaste, laxatives, diet pills, water-based paints, detergents, textile sizing, reusable heat packs, various paper products, and also in leather crafting to help burnish edges.[6][7][verification needed]

Regulated therapeutic uses[edit]
This section needs expansion with: a more expert, thorough description of CMC use in federally regulated drugs and devices. You can help by adding to it.  (November 2022)
In ophthalmology, CMC is used as in artificial tears, in the treatment of treat dry eyes.[8]

Enzymology[edit]
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Insoluble micro granular CMC is used as a cation-exchange resin in ion-exchange chromatography for the purification of proteins.[9] The level of derivatization is much lower,[according to whom?] so the solubility properties of micro granular cellulose are retained, while adding sufficient negatively charged carboxylate groups to bind to positively charged proteins.[citation needed]
Moreover, CMC has also been used extensively to characterize enzyme activity from endoglucanases (part of the cellulase complex); it is a highly specific substrate for endo-acting cellulases, as its structure has been engineered to decrystallize cellulose and create amorphous sites that are ideal for endoglucanase action.[citation needed] CMC is desirable because the catalysis product (glucose) is easily measured using a reducing sugar assay, such as 3,5-dinitrosalicylic acid.[citation needed] Using CMC in enzyme assays is especially important in screening for cellulase enzymes that are needed for more efficient cellulosic ethanol conversion.[citation needed] CMC was misused in early work with cellulase enzymes, as many had associated whole cellulase activity with CMC hydrolysis.[according to whom?] As the mechanism of cellulose depolymerization became better understood, it became clear that exo-cellulases are dominant in the degradation of crystalline (e.g. Avicel) and not soluble (e.g. CMC) cellulose.[citation needed]

Food science[edit]
CMC is used in food under the E number E466 or E469 (when it is enzymatically hydrolyzed), as a viscosity modifier or thickener, and to stabilize emulsions in various products, including ice cream.[7][6] CMC is also used extensively in gluten-free and reduced-fat food products.[10]
CMC is used to achieve tartrate or cold stability in wine, an innovation that may save megawatts of electricity used to chill wine in warm climates. It is more stable than metatartaric acid and is very effective in inhibiting tartrate precipitation. It is reported that KHT crystals, in presence of CMC, grow slower and change their morphology.[11][non-primary source needed][better source needed] Their shape becomes flatter because they lose 2 of the 7 faces, changing their dimensions. CMC molecules, negatively charged at wine pH, interact with the electropositive surface of the crystals, where potassium ions are accumulated. The slower growth of the crystals and the modification of their shape are caused by the competition between CMC molecules and bitartrate ions for binding to the KHT crystals.[12][full citation needed]

Specific culinary uses[edit]
CMC powder is widely used in the ice cream industry, to make ice creams without churning or extremely low temperatures, thereby eliminating the need for conventional churners or salt ice mixes.[13] CMC is used in baking breads and cakes. The use of CMC gives the loaf an improved quality at a reduced cost, by reducing the need of fat. CMC is also used as an emulsifier in biscuits. By dispersing fat uniformly in the dough, it improves the release of the dough from the moulds and cutters, achieving well-shaped biscuits without any distorted edges. It can also help to reduce the amount of egg yolk or fat used in making the biscuits. Use of CMC in candy preparation ensures smooth dispersion in flavor oils, and improves texture and quality. CMC is used in chewing gums, margarines and peanut butter as an emulsifier.[14]

Medical applications[edit]
This section has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
This section needs expansion with: a more expert, thorough description of CMC use in biomedicine. You can help by adding to it.  (November 2022)

 (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
CMC has been used in various medical applications.

Device for epistaxis (nose bleeding). A poly-vinyl chloride (PVC) balloon is covered by CMC knitted fabric reinforced by nylon. The device is soaked in water to form a gel, which is inserted into the nose of the balloon and inflated. The combination of the inflated balloon and the therapeutic effect of the CMC stops the bleeding.[citation needed]
Fabric used as a dressing following ear nose and throat surgical procedures.[citation needed]
Water is added to form a gel, and this gel is inserted into the sinus cavity following surgery.[citation needed]
In veterinary medicine, CMC is used in abdominal surgeries in large animals, particularly horses, to prevent the formation of bowel adhesions.[citation needed]

Other uses[edit]
This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (November 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
In laundry detergents, it is used as a soil suspension polymer designed to deposit onto cotton and other cellulosic fabrics, creating a negatively charged barrier to soils in the wash solution.[citation needed] CMC is also used as a thickening agent, for example, in the oil-drilling industry as an ingredient of drilling mud, where it acts as a viscosity modifier and water retention agent.[citation needed]
CMC is sometimes used as an electrode binder in advanced battery applications (i.e. lithium ion batteries), especially with graphite anodes. CMC's water solubility allows for less toxic and costly processing than with non-water-soluble binders, like the traditional polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF), which requires toxic n-methylpyrrolidone (NMP) for processing. CMC is often used in conjunction with styrene-butadiene rubber (SBR) for electrodes requiring extra flexibility, e.g. for use with silicon-containing anodes.[15]
CMC is also used in ice packs to form a eutectic mixture resulting in a lower freezing point, and therefore more cooling capacity than ice.[16]
Aqueous solutions of CMC have also been used to disperse carbon nanotubes, where the long CMC molecules are thought to wrap around the nanotubes, allowing them to be dispersed in water.[citation needed]
In conservation-restoration, it is used as an adhesive or fixative (commercial name Walocel, Klucel).[citation needed]

Adverse reactions[edit]
This section relies excessively on references to primary sources. Please improve this section by adding secondary or tertiary sources. Find sources: "Carboxymethyl cellulose" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (November 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Effects on inflammation, microbiota-related metabolic syndrome, and colitis are a subject of research.[17] Carboxymethyl cellulose is suggested as a possible cause of inflammation of the gut, through alteration of the human gastrointestinal microbiota, and has been suggested as a triggering factor in inflammatory bowel diseases such as ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease.[18][non-primary source needed]
While thought to be uncommon, case reports of severe reactions to carboxymethyl cellulose exist.[19] Skin testing is believed to be a useful diagnostic tool for this purpose.[20]
Carboxymethyl cellulose was the active ingredient in an eye drop brand Ezricare Artificial Tears which was recalled due to potential bacterial contamination.[21]

See also[edit]
Croscarmellose sodium
Hydroxypropyl cellulose
Methyl cellulose
References[edit]


^ "Carboxy Methyl Cellulose". www.kimachemical.com. Retrieved 27 February 2023.

^ Codex Alimentarius Commission (2016). "Sodium carboxymethyl cellulose (Cellulose gum)". GFSA Online. FAO.

^ "Products - SE Tylose". www.setylose.com. Retrieved 2022-11-17.

^ Hollabaugh, C. B.; Burt, Leland H.; Walsh, Anna Peterson (October 1945). "Carboxymethylcellulose. Uses and Applications". Industrial & Engineering Chemistry. 37 (10): 943–947. doi:10.1021/ie50430a015.

^ https://www.colonygums.com/uploads/COLONYGUMS_CMC.pdf[bare URL PDF]

^ a b "CP Kelco Cellulose Gum / Carboxymethyl Cellulose". Archived from the original on 2013-08-24. Retrieved 2013-07-17.

^ a b "Sodium Carboxymethylcellulose - The Ideal Hydrocolloid for Bakery & Dough Products" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-06-26.

^ Song, Jae Kyeong; Lee, Kiheon; Park, Hwa Yeon; Hyon, Joon Young; Oh, Seung-Won; Bae, Woo Kyung; Han, Jong-Soo; Jung, Se Young; Um, Yoo Jin; Lee, Ga-Hye; Yang, Ji Hye (January 2017). "Efficacy of Carboxymethylcellulose and Hyaluronate in Dry Eye Disease: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis". Korean Journal of Family Medicine. 38 (1): 2–7. doi:10.4082/kjfm.2017.38.1.2. ISSN 2005-6443. PMC 5305660. PMID 28197326.

^ "Whatman Filters & Sample Collection". Archived from the original on 2 May 2013. Retrieved 9 November 2016.

^ Stanford, John (January 2012). "Food Processing Technologies for Reduction of Fat in Products" (PDF). Food & Health Innovation Service. Scotland Food & Drink. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2014-10-23.

^ Gerbaud, Vincent (18 October 1996). Determination de l'etat de sursaturation et effet des polysaccharides sur la cristallisation du bitartrate de potassium dans les vins [Determination of the state of supersaturation and effect of polysaccharides on the crystallization of potassium bitartrate in wines] (PDF) (Ph.D.) (in French). Institut National Polytechnique de Talouse. Docket 961NP1030G. Retrieved 2017-05-07.

^ Cracherau et al. 2001.[full citation needed]

^ Bahramparvar, Maryam; Mazaheri Tehrani, Mostafa (October 2011). "Application and Functions of Stabilizers in Ice Cream". Food Reviews International. 27 (4): 389–407. doi:10.1080/87559129.2011.563399. S2CID 43187328.

^ "C.m.c. Glossary - Recipes with C.m.c. - Tarladalal.com". Retrieved 9 November 2016.

^ [1] Applications of sodium carboxymethyl cellulose As a Binder In Batteries

^ "Use in ice packs". Archived from the original on July 8, 2011.

^ Healy, Melissa (2015-02-25). "Is common food additive to blame for rising rates of bowel disease?". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 2017-07-12. Retrieved 2017-07-12.

^ Martino, John Vincent; Van Limbergen, Johan; Cahill, Leah E. (1 May 2017). "The Role of Carrageenan and Carboxymethylcellulose in the Development of Intestinal Inflammation". Frontiers in Pediatrics. 5: 96. doi:10.3389/fped.2017.00096. PMC 5410598. PMID 28507982.

^ Chassaing, Benoit; Compher, Charlene; Bonhomme, Brittaney; Liu, Qing; Tian, Yuan; Walters, William; Nessel, Lisa; Delaroque, Clara; Hao, Fuhua; Gershuni, Victoria; Chau, Lillian; Ni, Josephine; Bewtra, Meenakshi; Albenberg, Lindsey; Bretin, Alexis; McKeever, Liam; Ley, Ruth E.; Patterson, Andrew D.; Wu, Gary D.; Gewirtz, Andrew T.; Lewis, James D. (11 November 2021). "Randomized Controlled-Feeding Study of Dietary Emulsifier Carboxymethylcellulose Reveals Detrimental Impacts on the Gut Microbiota and Metabolome". Gastroenterology. 162 (3): 743–756. doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2021.11.006. PMC 9639366. PMID 34774538.

^ Lieberman, Phil. "Anaphylaxis to carboxymethylcellulose". American Academy of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology. Archived from the original on 2017-07-12. Retrieved 2017-07-12.

^ "Drug regulatory body takes eye drop samples from pharma firm linked to US deaths". 4 February 2023.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: url-status (link)


External links[edit]
CMC chemical structure and properties
MC and CMC: commercial preparations and various uses, including paper conservation; bibliography
Authority control: National 
Japan





Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Carboxymethyl_cellulose&oldid=1150427569"
Categories: CelluloseFood additivesCellulose ethersE-number additivesHidden categories: All articles with bare URLs for citationsArticles with bare URLs for citations from April 2023Articles with PDF format bare URLs for citationsCS1 French-language sources (fr)All articles with incomplete citationsArticles with incomplete citations from November 2022CS1 maint: url-statusArticles with short descriptionShort description matches WikidataArticles needing additional references from November 2022All articles needing additional referencesWikipedia introduction cleanup from November 2022All pages needing cleanupArticles covered by WikiProject Wikify from November 2022All articles covered by WikiProject WikifyArticles with multiple maintenance issuesChemicals that do not have a ChemSpider ID assignedChemicals without a PubChem CIDArticles without InChI sourceArticles without KEGG sourceArticles with changed EBI identifierECHA InfoCard ID from WikidataE number from WikidataArticles with changed FDA identifierArticles containing unverified chemical infoboxesShort description is different from WikidataAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from November 2022Articles to be expanded from November 2022All articles to be expandedAll pages needing factual verificationWikipedia articles needing factual verification from November 2022Articles needing additional references from July 2019All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrasesArticles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from November 2022All articles lacking reliable referencesArticles lacking reliable references from November 2022Articles with unsourced statements from October 2017Articles with NDL identifiers






 This page was last edited on 18 April 2023, at 03:22 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.


Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement











Toggle limited content width





