Document Name: role of Natrosol 250 HR (Hydroxyethyl Cellulose) in Care Cream4
Document link: https://knowledge.ulprospector.com/3937/pcc-natural-based-thickeners/




  


Natural-Based Thickeners - Prospector Knowledge Center
















































































Prospector Knowledge Center
Welcome to the blog for UL Prospector, the most comprehensive raw material search engine for product developers.











Menu

Home
Sustainability 

Articles
Webinars


Personal Care & Cosmetics 

Articles
Webinars
Industry Search Engine
Videos
Podcasts


Plastics 

Articles
Webinars
Industry Search Engine


Paint & Coatings 

Articles
Webinars
Industry Search Engine


Cleaners 

Articles
Webinars
Industry Search Engine


Food, Beverage & Nutrition 

Articles
Webinars
Industry Search Engine


Lubricants 

Articles
Industry Search Engine











Natural-Based Thickeners

              Posted on               March 4, 2016 by 
              

George Deckner


 — 3 comments




Share this article: 





All natural, aqueous-based polymeric thickeners are derived from polysaccharides with the most common being sourced from cellulose (wood, cotton) and starch (corn, potato). Other important polysaccharide sources include seaweed, plant seeds/roots, and those derived from fermentation. Most natural-based thickeners are either soluble or swellable polymers that bind or immobilize water to create structure or viscosity.
Cellulosics are the most commercially important and diverse class of natural-based thickeners with numerous anionic, cationic, and nonionic versions available. All derivatives are produced by first solubilizing cellulose with sodium hydroxide and then reacting with the functionalizing chemical.

Looking for natural-based thickeners?
Prospector has listings for natural-based thickeners from global suppliers. Get technical data, request samples and more now…

Search Thickeners


Carboxymethylcellulose (CMC) is one of the most important and cost effective natural-based thickeners on the market. It is an anionic polymer produced by reacting alkali cellulose with chloroacetic acid. Key properties are determined by the MW of the cellulose (high-700K, medium 250K, low-90K) and the degree of carboxylation per glucose molecule (DS-theoretical is 3). CMC can be either a soluble or swollen polymer or a combination depending on the MW and DS. Salt sensitivity is reduced using a low MW and high DS grade. The most thixotropic, viscous grades have a high MW and low DS.
Nonionic grades are produced by reacting alkali cellulose with ethylene oxide (hydroxyethylcellulose) or propylene oxide (hydroxypropylcellulose). Hydroxypropylmethylcellulose is made by first reacting the alkali cellulose with methyl chloride and then propylene oxide. Nonionic cellulosics are useful in formulations because they have excellent cationic, salt, PH tolerance and solvent tolerance. Some, like hydroxypropylcellulose, are also good thickeners for solvents like ethanol.
Starch derivatives are not commonly used in personal care. Many have poor viscosity stability over time. Hydroxypropyl starch phosphate is the only significant starch derivative used.
Xanthan is an anionic, fermentation-derived, polysaccharide that is widely used in cosmetics. Xanthan has an MW of 2-3 million Daltons and forms a double helical structure in most ionic solutions. Xanthan was discovered by the United States Department of Agriculture and commercialized in 1964 by CP Kelco. The key benefits of Xanthan include good salt/PH tolerance, high viscosity at low concentration, and the ability to maintain its viscosity profile at elevated temperatures.
Carrageenan is the most important seaweed-derived thickener used in personal care products. It is a sulfated, anionic polysaccharide that exists in three forms; Kappa, which has 1 sulfate group per galactose molecule, Iota- 2 sulfate groups, and Lamba-3 sulfate groups. Only the Iota form is widely used as a thickener.
Plant seed/root-based thickeners are widely used in foods but not in personal care formulations. The most significant materials are konjac mannan, locust bean, guar, and tara gum. These are galactomannans that react synergistically to build viscosity when combined with xanthan.
Cellulosic/starch thickeners (naturally derived/modified)

Aqualon 7H4 (Cellulose Gum) by Ashland is a low DS, high viscosity grade. A 1% dispersion has a viscosity of 2,500-6,000 cps.
Natrosol 250 HR/HHR Hydroxyethylcellulose, PC Grade (Hydroxyethylcellulose) by Ashland – A 1% dispersion has a viscosity of 3,400-5,000 cps.
Methocel 40-202 (Hydroxypropyl Methylcellulose) by Dow Chemical – A 2% dispersion has a viscosity of 4,000 cps.
Klucel Hydroxypropylcellulose, CS Grade Type H (Hydroxypropylcellulose) by Ashland – A 1% dispersion has a viscosity of 1,500-3000cps), can gel Ethanol
Natrosol Plus 330 CS Cetyl (Cetyl Hydroxyethylcellulose) by Ashland is a hydrophobic ally modified grade that can dramatically increase the viscosity of some o/w lamellar gel network based formulations. A 1% solution has a viscosity of 400 cps.
Avicel RC 591 (Microcrystalline Cellulose, Cellulose gum) by FMC is a 90% mixture of microcrystalline cellulose and CMC. The material forms extremely stable, thixotropic colloidal gels when dispersed in water using high shear.
Structure XL (Hydroxypropyl Starch Phosphate) by Akzo Nobel is a specially processed pre-gelatinized starch that disperses in cold water instantly without requiring sifting or premixing. A 4.5% dispersion has a viscosity of 2,000-7,000 cps and gels are salt stable.

Fermentation-based polysaccharide thickeners (all natural)

Keltrol Advanced Performance (Xanthan) by CP Kelco is much easier to hydrate in difficult media, even in the presence of solvent or salt. Better for suspending solids in thin dispersions than regular grade xanthan. A 1% solution has a viscosity of 13K cps.
Keltrol CG (Xanthan) by CP Kelco – A 1% solution has a viscosity of 1200-1600 cps in 1% potassium chloride.
Amaze XT (Dehydoxanthan) by Akzo Nobel is a specially-processed xanthan gum that has significantly higher viscosity than normal grades. It, however, has reduced electrolyte tolerance. A 1% solution has a viscosity of 38K cps and 10K cps with 3% salt. It forms clear solutions.
Actigum CS-11 QD (Scleroglucan) by Cargill is a fermentation produced polysaccharide that is nonionic, salt and high/low PH stable. Actigum, like xanthan gum, doesn’t lose viscosity at elevated temperature and has a high yield value. A 1% solution has a viscosity of 2-5K cps, 2% 61k cps.

Seaweed-based polysaccharide thickeners (all natural)

Genuvisco TPC-1 (Carrageenan) by CP Kelco is an Iota form of carrageenan designed for cold processing that is stable over a PH of 4.5-11. The processed viscosity is low until electrolyte is added. A 1% gel has a viscosity of 18K with 3% salt added.
 Gelcarin GP 379 (Carrageenan) by FMC is an Iota form of carrageenan that rapidly hydrates at RT. A 1% gel in water has a viscosity of 32K cps without salt and a 2% gel 27k with 3% salt.

Plant seed/root-based polysaccharide thickeners (all natural)

Propol A (Mannan) by Shimizu Chemical is a highly purified galactomannan derived from konjac flour. A 1% gel has a viscosity of around 50k cps with or without 3% sodium chloride, is stable at a PH of 3-9, and has an excellent skin feel.
Solagum Tara (Caesalpinia Spinosa Gum (Tara gum)) by Seppic is a nonionic GRAS polysaccharide that forms electrolyte stable gels. The gels have a non-sticky, smooth feel and the materials quickly hydrate in cold water. A 1% solution in water has a viscosity of 3100-4500 cps and is significantly less stringy and thicker than a 1% xanthan solution.

The views, opinions and technical analyses presented here are those of the author or advertiser, and are not necessarily those of ULProspector.com or UL. The appearance of this content in the UL Prospector Knowledge Center does not constitute an endorsement by UL or its affiliates. 
All content is subject to copyright and may not be reproduced without prior authorization from UL or the content author. 
The content has been made available for informational and educational purposes only. While the editors of this site may verify the accuracy of its content from time to time, we assume no responsibility for errors made by the author, editorial staff or any other contributor. 
UL does not make any representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy, applicability, fitness or completeness of the content.  UL does not warrant the performance, effectiveness or applicability of sites listed or linked to in any content. 

Share this article: 









                Filed Under: Personal Care & Cosmetics 


About George DecknerGeorge Deckner brings over 40 years of experience as a formulating chemist to his role as a personal care and cosmetics industry expert at Prospector. His rich professional background in innovative product development, research, material science and exploratory formulation, as well as a passion for developing products that make people’s lives more comfortable and happy, inform the articles he writes for Knowledge.ULProspector.com.
In addition to lending his industry expertise to Prospector, George consults with personal care and cosmetics suppliers. He founded his consulting practice, Deckner Consulting Services, after retiring from Procter & Gamble in 2013, where he was a Victor Miles Research Fellow. While at Procter and Gamble, he worked in skin care product development, global fragrance development, and most recently oral care product development in the Oral Care Advanced Technology Innovation Group. Before being appointed a Victor Miles Research Fellow, he also served as Associate Director of Exploratory Formulation for skin care product development.
While at Procter & Gamble, George was one of the top inventors, with 354 granted and filed global patents (201 U.S. patents). He helped develop many of the core platform technologies used in skin care today with numerous products commercialized under the Olay, Bain de Soleil, Clearasil, Noxzema and SK2 brands.
Previously, George was a Senior Chemist and Manager in the area of skin care product development, as well as the Director of Exploratory Formulation for Charles of the Ritz Group. During this time, George received the President’s Cup Award for outstanding business contribution and developed numerous marketed skin care products under the Bain de Soleil, Jean Nate, Yves Saint Laurent and Charles of the Ritz Brands.
George is a current member of the Society of Cosmetic Chemists and is on the scientific advisory board for Cosmetics & Toiletries Magazine. He is a frequent guest lecturer for numerous key global suppliers, as well as for local and national SCC meetings.
George is an avid tennis player and follower of the sport. He lives in Cincinnati, Ohio.
Learn more about Deckner Consulting Services…
Learn more about George

3 Responses to “Natural-Based Thickeners”





Shoaib Arif says: 

March 8, 2016 at 11:50 am 


Excellent article. One problem I see with all these natural thickeners is their inability to build viscosity in the presence of high amount of surfactants. Particularly surfactants like APG’s will not get thickened by any of the natural thickeners except may be Xanthan. But Xanthan has a long flow and stringy consistency.







Tim Brown says: 

March 18, 2016 at 7:28 am 


Solagum AX from SEPPIC is designed to address the issues often experienced with Xanthan Gum.
SEPPIC’s ‘Natural Shampoo’ formulation (EU07178), available on the website, is a good example of the APG thickening performance of Solagum AX.







Maritza Amigo says: 

February 25, 2018 at 12:28 pm 


I agree, excellent article. one thing is missing though is to describe the clarity/opacity level of each thickener.
thanks.






Leave a Reply or CommentYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
Website 
 

Δ 









Follow Prospector







Related Articles
More "Personal Care & Cosmetics" articles:

How to Spot Cosmetic Trends
Clean Beauty Market Surges in U.S.
Guilty of Greenwashing Without Realizing It?







 





 





 






 













About Prospector
Company Information
Contact Us
Call for Knowledge Center Contributors

 


Industry Search Engines
Adhesives & Sealants
Food, Beverage & Nutrition
Graphic Arts & Inks
Household, Industrial & Institutional Cleaners
Lubricant & Metalworking Fluids
Paint & Coatings
Personal Care & Cosmetics
Plastics, Metals & Additives

 


Prospector
7930 Santa Fe, 3rd Floor
Overland Park, KS 66204 USA
Phone: 913-307-9010


 






        UL and the UL logo are trademarks of UL LLC © 2023 All Rights Reserved.  | Online Policies
 | Site Map



Find Ingredients Faster on ULProspector.com 





