Document Name: role of COSMOWAX J in Cover Cream4
Document link: http://www.thegoodscentscompany.com/data/rw1298331.html





cetostearyl alcohol, 67762-27-0






















TGSC Information System



Home
About
Associations
Contact
Categories
Search





EU/US
Properties
Organoleptics
Cosmetics
Suppliers
Safety
Safety in use
Safety references
References
Other
Blenders
Uses
Occurrence
Synonyms
Articles
Notes

 

cetostearyl alcohol
1-octadecanol mixed with 1-hexadecanol
Supplier Sponsors



BOC Sciences


Best of Chemicals Supplier
Quality supplier of research chemicals and biochemicals including inhibitors, building blocks, GMP Products, impurities and metabolites, APIs for Veterinary, Natural Compounds, ADCs, Stem Cell Molecule and chiral compounds.
BOC Sciences provides a wide range of services to support the pharmaceutical industry through all stages of drug discovery including Custom Synthesis of those chemicals that are not in stock, Isotope Labeling Service, Chiral Synthesis and Resolution, Bioconjugation, PEGylation services, analytical services.
BOC Sciences is a brand of BOCSCI Inc. We leverage our wide spectrum of business in the fields of development, manufacturing, marketing, and distribution to help you make best-informed decisions tailored to your evolving needs for premium chemicals. Our complete suite of CRO services spans the entire molecule development pipeline including contract research for target identification, building blocks, compound synthesis, biochemical and cellular analysis, preclinical animal tests, and clinical studies.
Email:Marketing
US Email:Marketing
Email:Sales
US Email:Sales
Voice:1-631-485-4226
Fax:1-631-614-7828
US Voice:1-631-485-4226
US Fax:1-631-614-7828
Europe44-203-286-1088
Facebook
Twitter
Linkedin
Blog
Get the App!
CODE129833             CODE129833          
Product(s):
67762-27-0 Cetearyl alcohol 95%






Charkit Chemical Corporation


The Specialty Chemical Specialists
Explore this website to discover the products and services that Charkit provides for your industry and please contact us directly to find out how we can be of service to you.
about: Since 1982, Charkit has been committed to expanding the markets we serve as our roster of products and services continues to grow with us.  Our substantial portfolio of personal care ingredients now include a wide array of luxury and exotic components to compliment the key products we have always offered. We have expanded our offerings to the nutraceutical, industrial, and resin markets with a growing roster of versatile and unique ingredients.  We continue to lead the way in our traditional markets such as Metal and Water Treatment, Imaging, Flavor & Fragrance, Aroma and Food.  Our Pharmaceutical offerings continue to expand, still anchored by the Boronic Derivatives that meet the demands of Suzuki coupling reactions.  Please contact us to learn how we can help you reach your goals.
Email:Sales
Voice:203-299-3220
Fax:203-299-1355
Facebook
Twitter
Linkedin
Latest News
Events
Blog
Products List:View
CODE129833             CODE129833          
Product(s):
CETO STEARYL ALCOHOL






ECSA Chemicals


Human Chemistry
ECSA Chemicals has been active since 1913 in the trading and international commerce of raw materials. With an organisation divided into industrial segments managed by specialists, it has become one of the largest distributors worldwide.
ECSA Chemicals is the largest Swiss-owned company in terms of warehouses for the distribution of chemical products. We have been distributing chemical products for over 100 years and we have a special interest in protecting the environment and in the safety of our facilities and collaborators.
Established in 1913 as a small grocery store, in its over 100 years of activity ECSA Chemicals has become one of the most important Swiss-owned distributors of chemical products. The company, which is active in international distribution and trading, is organised into industrial segments that are managed by teams of specialists and experts. They guarantee professional and customised consultancy and services.

With our experience, we can rapidly and safely connect you with the best suppliers on the market, providing you with a complete search, consulting and assistance service.

The focus of our approach and operations is you, our customers. We strive every day to find the best products that satisfy your needs as quickly as possible. Your satisfaction is our greatest success.

WHY CHOOSE ECSA?
EXPERIENCE
We have been working for 100 years.

QUALITY
We have obtained many certifications (ISO, SQAS, GDP, Responsible Care, Bio-Inspecta, RSPO, etc.). We guarantee full compliance with the current laws and continuous training for our staff.

SAFETY
We constantly carry out risk analyses for each infrastructure, defining safety levels and implementing corrective measures promptly wherever they are needed.

WIDESPREAD DISTRIBUTION
We have warehouses in strategic locations to supply goods to Switzerland and to the rest of the world.

STORAGE CAPACITY
The 3 ECSA-owned warehouses guarantee considerable storage area and capacity in each warehouse, with full availability of products (base chemicals and speciality chemicals).

SPEED
Presence all over the country, staff dedicated to sourcing raw materials and considerable storage capacity guarantee that goods are rapidly obtained and supplied.

CONSULTANCY
Our specialists - in-depth knowledge of the market and products allows us to provide full consulting services, from the purchase to the supply of raw materials.

Email:Info
Email:Sales
Email:Trading
Email:Maintenance
Email:Energy
Voice:+41 91 695 88 00
Fax:+41 91 695 88 01
Linkedin
Youtube
RSS Feed
ECSA Trade
ECSA TRADE THE MOST UPDATED FINANCIAL PUBLICATION ON THE WORLD OF CHEMISTRY
Products List:View
CODE129833             CODE129833          
Product(s):
MP-012001 CETYLSTEARYLALCOHOL 70-30
MP-012002 CETYLSTEARYLALCOHOL 50-50
MP-024710 CETEARYL ALCOHOL (AND) CETEARETH-25
MP-025685 CETEARYL ALCOHOL (AND) CETEARYL GLUCOSIDE
MP-060000 CETYL STEARYL ALCOHOL 12 OE
MP-060001 CETYL STEARYL ALCOHOL 25 OE
MP-060006 CETYL STEARYL ALCOHOL 30 OE
MP-060007 CETEARYL ALCOHOL 2 EO
MP-030062 CETYLSTEARYLALCOHOL ORAL






OQEMA


With a focus on providing the highest level of service
OQEMA has established itself at the forefront of the global chemical industry.
The guiding principles of OQEMA have always been to establish long term relationships with customers and suppliers alike to build sustainable and profitable business for all parties. Through OQEMA’s business divisions the company tailors products and services to better support and service our customers requirements. This structure also allows the company to focus its marketing campaigns more effectively to certain industries. Over the last decade OQEMA has achieved strong growth as a result of the expansion of our business model. Going forward, the company will be expanding this business model into existing and new strategic territories.
Email:Contact Us:
US Email:Dean Matienzo
Email:Sales
US Email:Dean Matienzo - Sales Manager
Voice:+44 1993 843081
Fax:+44 1993 841261
US Voice:+1 973 886 3778
US Fax:+1 973 346 1106
Linkedin
Website
Global Distribution
CODE129833             CODE129833          
Product(s):
LanCos EMCS






Penta International Corporation


Chemistry innovation
At Penta, our products and services help businesses do business better.
For over 30 years, Penta Manufacturing Company has played a growing role in worldwide chemistry innovations and applications. As an industry leader, Penta continues to pioneer chemistry-based solutions for practically every area of commerce. Our products and expertise have helped fuel technical advances in dozens of commercial applications including flavoring, coloring, fragrances and chemical processes.
US Email:Technical Services
US Email:Sales
US Voice:(973) 740-2300
US Fax:(973) 740-1839
CODE129833             CODE129833          
Product(s):
03-17790 CETOSTEARYL ALCOHOL









CAS Number: 67762-27-03D/inchi

Other(deleted CASRN):8005-44-5
ECHA EINECS - REACH Pre-Reg:267-008-6
FDA UNII: 2DMT128M1S
Molecular Weight:512.94624000
Formula:C34 H72 O2
NMR Predictor:Predict (works with chrome, Edge or firefox)


Category:cosmetic agents
 
US / EU / FDA / JECFA / FEMA / FLAVIS / Scholar / Patent Information:


Google Scholar:Search
Google Books:Search
Google Scholar: with word "volatile"Search
Google Scholar: with word "flavor"Search
Google Scholar: with word "odor"Search
Google Patents:Search
US Patents:Search
EU Patents:Search
Pubchem Patents:Search
PubMed:Search
NCBI:Search
FDA Mainterm (IAUFC):67762-27-0 ;  CETOSTEARYL ALCOHOL


 
Physical Properties:


Assay: 95.00 to 100.00 

Food Chemicals Codex Listed: No
Boiling Point: 334.00 to  335.00 °C. @  760.00 mm Hg (est)

Vapor Pressure:0.000009 mmHg @  25.00 °C. (est)
Flash Point: 282.00 °F. TCC (  138.70 °C. ) (est)

logP (o/w):  8.314 (est)
Soluble in:
 water, 0.1495 mg/L @ 25 °C (est)


 
Organoleptic Properties:


Odor Strength:none
Odor Description:at 100.00 %. mild waxy
Odor and/or flavor descriptions from others (if found).


 
Cosmetic Information:


CosIng:cosmetic data
Cosmetic Uses: 

emulsion stabilisers
opacifying agents
skin conditioning - emollient
surfactants
surfactant - emulsifying
surfactant - foam boosting
viscosity controlling agents



 
Suppliers:


BOC Sciences
For experimental / research use only.
Cetearyl alcohol 95%

Charkit Chemical
CETO STEARYL ALCOHOL

Croda
Cosmowax™ D
Odor: blandUse: Nonionic emulsifying wax - an optimised combination of vegetable-derived emulsifiers and stabilisers.
Croda
Cosmowax™ J
Odor: blandUse: Nonionic emulsifying wax - an optimised combination of vegetable-derived emulsifiers and stabilisers.
Croda
Crodacol™ CS50
Odor: blandUse: Technically pure grade of vegetable-derived cetostearyl alcohol recommended for personal care applications. Impart dry waxy emollience to creams and lotions. Emulsion stabilisers and viscosity builders. Used to modify structure and feel of anhydrous salves and sticks.
Croda
Crodafos™ CES
Odor: blandUse: Phosphate-based emulsifying and conditioning wax conferring excellent functionality to a wide range of personal care systems. Emulsifying wax and conditioning agent for wide ranging skin and hair care applications. Ideal for use in waterproof sun care where it has been proven to boost SPF and enhance resistance to wash-off. Can also be used in hair relaxer systems where it promotes rapid penetration of hydroxide ions and helps to prevent cuticle damage due to over processing.
Croda
Crodafos™ CS20A
Odor: blandUse: High actives (50%) primary emulsifier designed to enhance viscosity control  especially suited for pourable emulsions with high active loads (liquid foundations) or other medium to low viscosity products such as body sprays, milks and depilatories. An O/W emulsifier specifically designed for pourable emulsions with high active loads (e.g. liquid foundations) and other medium to low viscosity products e.g. sprayable emulsions. Naturally substantive to the skin and imparts conditioning benefits. Wide pH tolerance. Requires neutralisation which can be done in situ.
Croda
Crodex™ A
Odor: blandUse: Anionic emulsifying wax conforming to the PhEur monograph.
Croda
Crodex™ N
Odor: blandUse: Nonionic emulsifying wax - an optimised combination of vegetable-derived emulsifiers and stabilisers.
ECSA Chemicals
CETEARYL ALCOHOL (AND) CETEARETH-25

ECSA TRADE THE MOST UPDATED FINANCIAL PUBLICATION ON THE WORLD OF CHEMISTRY
ECSA Chemicals
CETEARYL ALCOHOL (AND) CETEARYL GLUCOSIDE

ECSA Chemicals
CETEARYL ALCOHOL 2 EO

ECSA Chemicals
CETYL STEARYL ALCOHOL 12 OE

ECSA Chemicals
CETYL STEARYL ALCOHOL 25 OE

ECSA Chemicals
CETYL STEARYL ALCOHOL 30 OE

ECSA Chemicals
CETYLSTEARYLALCOHOL 50-50

ECSA Chemicals
CETYLSTEARYLALCOHOL 70-30

ECSA Chemicals
CETYLSTEARYLALCOHOL ORAL

HallStar
HALLSTAR® NCD-20
Odor: characteristicUse: HallStar NCD-20 is a high quality, readily emulsifiable product. It consists of a defined proportion of Cetearyl Alcohol (common name Cetostearyl Alcohol or Cetyl Stearyl Alcohol) and Ceteareth-20.
HallStar NCD-20 has broad pH stability and finds application as an oil-in-water (O/W) emulsion base. It may be used as the primary or secondary emulsifier in a wide variety of lotions, creams and pastes. Because it is not an ester and is nonionic, it can be used in systems far from neutral pH, such as hair relaxers, depilatories, creme lotion developers, and AHA skin care creams.
HallStar NCD-20 is dispersible in hot water and is typically utilized at 1 to 2.5% when utilized as a co-emulsifier and at up to 10% of the finished product composition when it is the sole emulsifier.
Jarchem Industries
Jarcol™ I-167
Odor: characteristicUse: A liquid product similar in properties to Isostearyl alcohol with a high amount of C17 alcohols.
Lipo Chemicals
Lipocol® SC-1618 Pastilles
Odor: characteristicUse: Lipocol® SC-1618 is a blend of high quality cetyl and stearyl alcohols. It is a white waxy solid with a typically fatty odor.  Lipocol® SC-1618 is widely used in the cosmetic industry in cream rinse applications and in emulsions where it acts as a viscosity builder and a co-emulsifier.
Lipo Chemicals
Lipocol® SC
Odor: characteristicUse: Lipocol® SC is a blend of high quality cetyl and stearyl alcohols. It is a white waxy solid with a typically fatty odor.  Lipocol® SC is widely used in the cosmetic industry in antiperspirant sticks and in cream rinse applications.  It is also used in emulsions where it acts as a viscosity builder with a co-emulsifier.
Lipo Chemicals
Lipomulse® Luxe
Odor: characteristicUse: Lipomulse® Luxe is a complete emulsifier system that forms liquid crystals for enhanced emulsion stability and shiny white emulsions.  The unique blend of ingredients in Lipomulse® Luxe produce an elegant, soft feel that is long lasting and pleasant to the touch.
Lipo Chemicals
Lipowax® D
Odor: characteristicUse: Lipowax® D is an emulsifier system that can be used in skin care creams & lotions, liquid foundations,  hair color products, hair conditioners, peroxide creams and depilatories.  Lipowax® D can be used with co-emulsifiers.
Lipo Chemicals
Lipowax® NI
Odor: characteristicUse: Lipowax® NI forms fine-textured opaque emulsions. Lipowax® NI can be used as the sole emulsifier or in combination with ionic or other nonionic systems. It has good electrolyte tolerance.
Lipo Chemicals
Lipowax® P
Odor: characteristicUse: Lipowax® P is an emulsifier system that disperses easily in warm water to form elegant opaque emulsions. Can be used with co-emulsifiers. Lipowax® P is used in hair conditioners and masks, skin care creams and lotions and body washes. It is especially suited for acidic pH preparations and also for hair relaxers having high pH.
Lipo Chemicals
Lipowax® R2
Odor: characteristicUse: Lipowax® R2 is a complete emulsifying system which is a balanced blend of both lipophilic high molecular weight fatty alcohols and hydrophilic ethoxylated products.  Easily dispersed in warm water, Lipowax® R2 forms white opaque emulsions of varied consistency depending on the concentration.  Designed for use in hair relaxer systems, Lipowax® R2 also offers excellent performance in skin care formulations.
Mosselman
Cetostearylic Alcohol

Oleo Solutions
Alcohol C16-18 (30:70)
Odor: characteristicUse: Cosmetics and Personal Care, Cleaning and Detergents, Industrial, Pharmaceutical and Veterinary
Oleo Solutions
Alcohol C16-18 (50:50)
Odor: characteristicUse: Cosmetics and Personal Care, Cleaning and Detergents, Industrial, Pharmaceutical and Veterinary
OQEMA
LanCos EMCS

Penta International
CETOSTEARYL ALCOHOL

Strahl & Pitsch
Emulsifying Wax Pastilles SP-210P NF



 
Safety Information:


 
Hazards identification
 
 Classification of the substance or mixture
GHS Classification in accordance with 29 CFR 1910 (OSHA HCS)
None found.
 GHS Label elements, including precautionary statements
 
Pictogram
 
Hazard statement(s)
None found.
Precautionary statement(s)
None found.
Oral/Parenteral Toxicity: 

Not determined

Dermal Toxicity: 

Not determined

Inhalation Toxicity: 

Not determined



 
Safety in Use Information:


Category: cosmetic agents
Recommendation for cetostearyl alcohol usage levels up to:  not for fragrance use.

 
Recommendation for cetostearyl alcohol flavor usage levels up to: 
 not for flavor use.



 
Safety References:


EPI System: View
AIDS Citations:Search
Cancer Citations:Search
Toxicology Citations:Search
EPA Substance Registry Services (TSCA):67762-27-0
EPA ACToR:Toxicology Data
EPA Substance Registry Services (SRS):Registry
Laboratory Chemical Safety Summary :62238
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases:Data
WGK Germany:nwg
hexadecan-1-ol; octadecan-1-ol
Chemidplus:0067762270


 
References:


 hexadecan-1-ol; octadecan-1-ol
NIST Chemistry WebBook:Search Inchi
Canada Domestic Sub. List:67762-27-0
Pubchem (cid):62238
Pubchem (sid):135020551


 
Other Information:


(IUPAC):Atomic Weights of the Elements 2011 (pdf)
Videos:The Periodic Table of Videos
tgsc:Atomic Weights use for this web site
(IUPAC):Periodic Table of the Elements
FDA Indirect Additives used in Food Contact Substances:View
HMDB (The Human Metabolome Database):Search
ChemSpider:View
Wikipedia:View


 
Potential Blenders and core components note


None Found


 
Potential Uses:


 emollients
 emulsifying agents
 emulsion stabilisers
 opacifying agents
 viscosity controlling agents


 
Occurrence (nature, food, other):note


 not found in nature


 
Synonyms:


(C16-C18)alkyl alcohol(C16-C18)-alkyl alcohol alkyl alcohols C16-18 brookswax D cetax 50 cetearyl alcohol cetyl-stearyl alcohol cetyl/stearyl alcohol cosmowax cosmowax D cosmowax J crodacol CS50 crodacol CS90 crodafos CES crodafos CS20A crodex A crodex N emulsifying wax pastilles SP-210P NF hallstar NCD-20 hexadecan-1-ol; octadecan-1-ol jarcol I-167 lanette O lipocol SC lipocol SC-1618 pastilles lipomulse luxe lipowax D lipowax NI lipowax P lipowax R21-octadecanol mixed with 1-hexadecanol


 

Articles:


PubMed:Drug-excipient compatibility studies in binary mixtures of avobenzone.
PubMed:Drug-excipient compatibility studies in binary mixtures of avobenzone.
PubMed:Development and characterization of controlled release polar lipid microparticles of candesartan cilexetil by solid dispersion.
PubMed:Reduced burning and stinging associated with topical application of lactic acid 10% with strontium versus ammonium lactate 12%.
PubMed:Sucrose stearate-enriched lipid matrix tablets of etodolac: modulation of drug release, diffusional modeling and structure elucidation studies.
PubMed:Contact dermatitis caused by fatty alcohols: may polyethoxylation of the fatty alcohols influence their sensitizing potential?
PubMed:Why aqueous cream should not be used in radiotherapy-induced skin reactions.
PubMed:Design of cationic nanostructured heterolipid matrices for ocular delivery of methazolamide.
PubMed:Suitability of Gelucire 50/13 for controlled release formulation of salbutamol sulphate.
PubMed:Occupational allergic contact dermatitis from methyl aminolevulinate.
PubMed:A bilateral comparison study of pimecrolimus cream 1% and a topical medical device cream in the treatment of patients with atopic dermatitis.
PubMed:Formulation and in vitro evaluation of buoyant controlled release lercanidipine lipospheres.
PubMed:Natural surfactant-based topical vehicles for two model drugs: Influence of different lipophilic excipients on in vitro/in vivo skin performance.
PubMed:Development of extended release divalproex sodium tablets containing hypdrophobic and hydrophilic matrix.
PubMed:Topical vehicles based on natural surfactant/fatty alcohols mixed emulsifier: The influence of two polyols on the colloidal structure and in vitro/in vivo skin performance.
PubMed:Matrix embedded microspherules containing indomethacin as controlled drug delivery systems.
PubMed:Stabilizing effect of cetostearyl alcohol and glyceryl monostearate as co-emulsifiers on hydrocarbon-free O/W glyceride creams.
PubMed:In vitro skin permeation of sunscreen agents from O/W emulsions.
PubMed:In vitro controlled drug release from loaded microspheres--dose regulation through formulation.
PubMed:Empirical kinetic model of propafenone release from Hot Air Coating microparticles.
PubMed:Evaluation of lotion formulations on irritation using the modified forearm-controlled application test method.
PubMed:The physicochemical characterization and in vitro/in vivo evaluation of natural surfactants-based emulsions as vehicles for diclofenac diethylamine.
PubMed:An alkylpolyglucoside surfactant as a prospective pharmaceutical excipient for topical formulations: the influence of oil polarity on the colloidal structure and hydrocortisone in vitro/in vivo permeation.
PubMed:Effect of poloxamers on nifedipine microparticles prepared by Hot Air Coating technique.
PubMed:Vehicles based on a sugar surfactant: Colloidal structure and its impact on in vitro/in vivo hydrocortisone permeation.
PubMed:Stabilization of solid dispersions of nimodipine and polyethylene glycol 2000.
PubMed:Evaluation of hydrophobic materials as matrices for controlled-release drug delivery.
PubMed:Characterization of nifedipine microparticles prepared by hot air coating technique.
PubMed:Determination of anionactive tensides using cetylpyridinium tetrachlorozincate as titrant. Analytical methods in respect to environmental and economical concern, part 20.
PubMed:Final report on the amended safety assessment of diisopropyl dimer dilinoleate, dicetearyl dimer dilinoleate, diisostearyl dimer dilinoleate, dioctyl dimer dilinoleate, dioctyldodecyl dimer dilinoleate, and ditridecyl dimer dilinoleate.
PubMed:Allergic contact dermatitis from cetearyl isononanoate.
PubMed:The development of Cutina lipogels and gel microemulsion for topical administration of fluconazole.
PubMed:Extended release lipophilic indomethacin microspheres: formulation factors and mathematical equations fitted drug release rates.
PubMed:Radiolysis characterization of cetostearyl alcohol by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry.
PubMed:The British standard series of contact dermatitis allergens: validation in clinical practice and value for clinical governance.
PubMed:Allergic contact dermatitis from cetrimide and cetearyl alcohol in Burnol-plus cream.
PubMed:Synchrotron X-ray investigations into the lamellar gel phase formed in pharmaceutical creams prepared with cetrimide and fatty alcohols.
PubMed:An investigation into the supramolecular structure of ternary gel systems using oscillatory rheometry, microscopy, and low frequency dielectric spectroscopy.
PubMed:Effects of drug concentration in inner aqueous phase and additives in oleaginous phase on release and bioavailability of isoniazid from multiple emulsion.
PubMed:Contact sensitization in chronic venous insufficiency: modern wound dressings.
PubMed:Contact dermatitis from cetostearyl alcohol.
PubMed:Variation in cetostearyl alcohol and lecithin from different sources: evaluation by dielectric analysis.
PubMed:Multiple emulsion-based systems carrying insulin: development and characterization.
PubMed:High incidence of contact dermatitis in leg-ulcer patients--implications for management.
PubMed:Contact dermatitis from cetostearyl alcohol in hydrocortisone butyrate lipocream, and from lanolin.
PubMed:Emulsification by the phase inversion temperature method: the role of self-bodying agents and the influence of oil polarity.
PubMed:Contact dermatitis to Hirudoid cream.
PubMed:Water distribution in creams prepared using cetostearyl alcohol and cetrimide.
PubMed:An investigation of the structural changes occurring in a cetostearyl alcohol/cetrimide/water gel after prolonged low temperature (4 degrees C) storage.
PubMed:The effect of temperature on the conductivity of gels and emulsions prepared from cetrimide and cetostearyl alcohol.
PubMed:Reflectance measurements on gels and emulsions containing cetrimide and cetostearyl alcohol--a preliminary investigation.
PubMed:[Internal structure of oil-in-water emulsions stabilized with a cetostearyl alcohol].
PubMed:Allergy to cetylalcohol.
PubMed:[Contact allergy to cetylstearylalcohol (Lanette O) as a therapeutic problem in stasis dermatitis and leg ulcer].
PubMed:Lanette-O--another test substance for lower leg series.
PubMed:Proceedings: The structure of the continuous phases in creams stabilised by cetrimide and cetostearyl alcohol.
PubMed:The composition of cetostearyl alcohol.
PubMed:Rheology of systems containing cetrimide-cetostearyl alcohol: variation with temperature.
PubMed:The self-bodying action of the mixed emulsifier cetrimide-cetostearyl alcohol.



 
Notes: component of creams, ointments, emulsifying agents.  tsca definition 2008: this substance is identified by sda substance name: c16-c18 alkyl alcohol and sda reporting number: 19-060-00. consult sda substance identification procedure.








Please share your Comments.
Email Address:






Top of Page  Home

Copyright © 1980-2021 The Good Scents Company (tgsc) ™  Disclaimer Privacy Policy


