Document Name: role of COSMOWAX J in Cover Cream0
Document link: https://www.ulprospector.com/en/eu/PersonalCare/Detail/1409/56441/Cosmowax-J




Cosmowax™ J by Croda - Personal Care & Cosmetics












































Login


Register


English 



                              Deutsch
                            



                              Français
                            



                              Español
                            



                              Português
                            



                              English
                            



                              简体中文
                            



                              繁體中文
                            



                              日本語
                            




Europe (EMEA) 



                              Asia Pacific
                            



                              Europe (EMEA)
                            



                              Latin America
                            



                              North America
                            














Search



Region

User













Search







Samples (0)












Home


Personal Care & Cosmetics


Cosmowax™ J
        



    Cosmowax™ J
    


Company:
Croda




Documents



Cosmowax™ J Datasheet


Cosmowax™ J


Create Together - A World of Possibilites




Croda makes their documentation available in the regions indicated below:










Cosmowax™ J is an extremely versatile nonionic surface active agent. It may be employed as primary or secondary oil-in-water emulsifiers, bodying agents or opacifiers, enabling the formulation of a variety of cosmetic and pharmaceutical systems. This grade produces emulsions of a heavier nature and is ideal for the formulation of heavy bodied creams and as an auxiliary emulsifier or stabiliser.



                Upgrade to Prospector Premium to view Compliance Highlights
                    Learn More

Retailer Compliance Status
No retailer information is available at this time.
Regulatory & Advisory Status
No regulatory information is available at this time.
Compliance information powered by UL's ChemADVISOR™ Regulatory Database.


Company
Croda is a leading innovator and supplier of specialty raw materials for Personal Care and Cosmetics. Croda’s team of technologists have developed unique technologies that combine natural raw material sourcing with creative chemistry to provide exceptional solutions for current and future industry trends in hair care, skin care, sun care, and color cosmetics, while maintaining Eco-friendly standards.
Company Documents

Formulating for Halal: Certified Ingredient Guide
Create Together - A World of Possibilites
The HLB System - Croda's Time-Saving Guide to Surfactant Selection - Personal Care Edition
Incroslip™ When Stability and Performance Matter Most
Hot Ten Asian Skin Care Special




        The information presented here was acquired by UL from the producer of the product or material or original information provider.  However, UL assumes no responsibility or liability for the accuracy of the information contained on this website and strongly encourages that upon final product or material selection information is validated with the manufacturer.  This website provides links to other websites owned by third parties. The content of such third party sites is not within our control, and we cannot and will not take responsibility for the information or content.
    



Create Your Free Account

Visit the supplier's site for support
            

Share:











Categories
Chemical Class Categories

Mixtures

Functionality Categories

Stabilizers
Surfactants ~ Emulsifying Agents



Where to Buy
Croda

Visit Website


            Are you a distributor who is interested in being listed here? Contact us!
        










×
Premium Compliance Highlights​
Available with a Premium Prospector Account



                        With a Premium Prospector account, view regulatory advisory and retailer compliance on an ingredients level for your material searches.  The full set of lists reviewed have been curated by UL's LOLI Regulatory Database specific for Prospector.  Upgrade today!
                    

A sample of Global Regulatory & Advisory Lists Reviewed:


Prop 65 listings
Canadian Hotlist
Japan Cosmetics Standards
ASEAN and MERCOSUR Cosmetics requirements


A sample of Retailer Compliance Lists Reviewed:


Wal-Mart
Target












×Close

View Compliance Highlights in Prospector​



                            Make smarter decisions with instant access to industry-specific regulatory content when you upgrade to a premium Prospector account. You can also search products with industry certifications like ECOCERT, COSMOS, USDA Organic and more. Try a premium account free for your first month!
                        

View ingredients by Name (CAS Number)
Evaluate selected global regulatory lists including: Prop 65, Canadian Hotlist, Japan Cosmetics Standards and hundreds more​
Identify retailer ingredient restrictions​
View natural and organic certifications of qualified products​


Upgrade To Premium








×Close

ABOUT
Prospector Lists



                        Lists combine the ease of Bookmarks with the versatility of Tags. Instead of one collection of bookmarked items, create as many collections, called "Lists," as you need.
                    
Previous Bookmarks and Tags




                                Find the link to your List page in the user menu.
                            

                            All Tags have been converted to separate Lists, and your bookmarked items have been saved to a "Bookmarks" List.




Adding Items

                        When you click the Add to List button, a dropdown of your existing Lists appears. Click the List name to which you want to add this product or formula.
                    



Create a New List

                        You can also create a new List. Simply click "Create a New List" and enter a name.
                    



Multiple Lists

                        When you define a new List, the current item is automatically added to it. You can add a product or formula to as many Lists as you need.



Explore Your Lists

                        Easily see which Lists this item appears in, and quickly go to that List from the links that appear on the page.



 Back







Next 
Done 


















 About
          

About
Prospector
Contact Us
Advertising Programs
Datasheet Services
Knowledge Center

Data Subject Access Request Portal





 Formulating Materials & Ingredients
          

Formulating Materials & Ingredients
Adhesives & Sealants
Food, Beverage & Nutrition
Graphic Arts & Inks
Household, Industrial & Institutional Cleaners
Lubricant & Metalworking Fluids
Paint & Coatings
Personal Care & Cosmetics




 Solid Materials
          

Solid Materials

Metals
Plastics
Plastics Additives





            UL is a global independent safety science company offering expertise in certification, validation, testing, inspections, auditing, education and advisory services. Our breadth, established objectivity and proven history mean we are a symbol of trust and enable us to help provide peace of mind to all.
          

Learn More





          UL and the UL logo are trademarks of UL LLC ©2023 All Rights Reserved.

          
Terms & Conditions
Privacy Policy
Data Policy









×


We're sorry, but the industry you have selected is not currently available in your chosen language. You may choose a language below to continue to this industry or close this dialog above.

English
Simplified Chinese









GDPR Notice:
Close














  









