Document Name: role of Glycerol in Make up Cream1
Document link: https://www.cosmeticsinfo.org/ingredients/glycerin/









Glycerin - Cosmetics Info









































 










Skip to content










THE SCIENCE & SAFETY BEHIND YOUR FAVORITE PRODUCTS                        



Safety Basics 
What’s In My Products 
Get the Facts 
Regulation & Oversight 
About Us 
Multimedia 











Find An Ingredient






















ProductsWhat’s In My Products

Shelf Life
Baby

Baby Lotions, Oils, Powders and Creams
Baby Shampoos


Bath

Bath Capsules, Oils, Tablets and Salts
Bubble Baths


Eye Makeup

Eyeliner
Eye Color
Eye Makeup Remover
Eyebrow Pencil
Mascara


Facial Makeup

Cheek Color
Concealers
Face Powders
Foundations
Lip Color


Fragrance

Colognes, Perfumes, and Fragrance Mists
Dusting Powders or Body Powders


Hair Care

Hair Conditioners
Hair Sprays
Hair Straighteners and Relaxers
Permanent Waves
Shampoos and Rinses
Tonics and Dressings


Hair Dye and Hair Coloring

Hair Bleaches
Hair Dyes and Colors
Hair Tints, Rinses and Shampoos


Nail

Artificial Nail Extension Products
Cuticle Oils, Creams and Lotions
Manicure and Pedicure Products
Nail Polish and Enamel and Removers


Oral Care

Mouthwashes and Breath Fresheners
Toothpastes


Personal Cleanliness

Antiperspirants and Deodorants
Douches
Feminine Deodorants
Soap


Shaving

Aftershave Lotion
Preshave Lotions (all types)
Shaving Creams
Shaving Soap


Skin Care

Body and Hand Creams and Lotions
Cleansers
Face and Neck Creams/Lotions
Foot Powders and Sprays
Moisturizers


Sunscreens and Sunless Tanners

Sunless Tanners
Sunscreen Frequently Asked Questions
Sunscreens: How to Read a Label, Expert Tips, etc.










Glycerin
SHARE THIS


Overview
Safety
Resources



What Is It?
Glycerin (sometimes called glycerol) is a naturally occurring alcohol compound found in all animal, plant, and human tissues, including the skin and blood. Glycerin used in cosmetics and personal care products can be obtained from natural sources (e.g., soybeans, cane, or corn syrup sugar) or manufactured synthetically. This synthetic form is chemically identical to naturally-occurring glycerin and the body handles both the same way.
Why is it used in cosmetics and personal care products?
Glycerin is used safely in numerous cosmetics and personal care products such as soaps, toothpaste, shaving cream, and skin/hair care products to provide smoothness and lubrication. It is also a well-known humectant that prevents the loss of moisture from products so they don’t dry out as quickly. Other reported functions for glycerin include use as a fragrance ingredient, denaturant, hair conditioning agent, oral care agent, skin conditioning agent— humectant, skin protectant, oral health care drug, and viscosity decreasing agent.
According to 2019 data in U.S. FDA’s Voluntary Cosmetic Registration Program (VCRP), glycerin is the third most frequently used ingredient in cosmetics (after water and fragrance). It was reported to be used in 23,366 products. This includes products for use near the eye, lipsticks, hair dyes and colors, bath soaps and detergents, skin care products, suntan preparations, and baby products. 
According to a survey conducted by the Personal Care Products Council (PCPC) in 2014, glycerin was used at concentrations up to 99.4% in some skin cleaning products.

Scientific Facts:
Glycerin is a precursor for synthesis of triglycerides and phospholipids in the liver and fat tissues. When the body uses stored fat as a source of energy, glycerol and fatty acids are released into the bloodstream. 
Glycerin is widely used in the food industry and in pharmaceutical (i.e., drug) formulations. In food and beverages, glycerin serves as a humectant, a solvent, and a sweetener and may help with preservation. Most dried fruits, for instance, have glycerin added during processing to attract moisture so they don’t become brittle over time. Glycerin’s high sugar content makes it ideal as a sweetener in candies and cookies, and its ability to maintain a smooth texture is the reason why it is added to ice cream and used as the base of toothpaste. Healthcare providers sometimes give glycerol intravenously (by IV) to reduce pressure inside the brain in various conditions including stroke, meningitis, encephalitis, and central nervous system (CNS) trauma.



Safety Information:
United States
CIR
Scientific data supporting the safety of glycerin as used in cosmetics and personal care products was thoroughly reviewed in 2014 by the Cosmetic Ingredient Review (CIR) Expert Panel. Based on the available literature and data, the Expert Panel concluded glycerin is safe in the present practices of use and concentration (i.e., up to 79% in leave-on products, 99% in rinse-off products).
FDA
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recognizes glycerin as generally recognized as safe (GRAS) for its use in food packaging and it is a multiple-purpose GRAS food substance when used in accordance with good manufacturing practices. [21CFR182.9021CFR182.1320] Glycerin is on FDA’s list of approved direct and indirect food additives. [21CFR172.866, 21CFR175.300, 21CFR178.3500] Also, glycerin is FDA-approved for use in over-the-counter (OTC) drugs such as anorectal drug products, skin protectants, ophthalmic drugs, and oral health care products. [21CFR346.1421CFR347.1021CFR349.12]
European Union (EU)
Glycerin is listed on the EU’s Inventory of Cosmetic Ingredients (CosIng) and is not restricted in any way, according to the general provisions of the Cosmetics Regulation of the European Union. Glycerin derived from raw materials of animal origin must comply with European Union animal by-products regulations.
Canada
According to Canada’s List of Ingredients that are Restricted for Use in Cosmetics, product manufacturers of oral and leave-on products containing glycerin must ensure the raw material used is within the specifications of an accepted pharmacopoeia with respect to diethylene glycol (DEG) impurities (e.g. Glycerin Official Monograph in the most current edition of the USP).
More safety Information:
CIR Review
The available scientific data for glycerin demonstrated low oral and dermal (skin) adverse effects following single and repeated doses. In addition, data showed there were no reported allergic skin reactions in human clinical studies.
In multiple laboratory reproduction and developmental safety studies, glycerin did not produce any adverse effects on parental reproductive capability or growth development, fertility, or reproductive performance of their offspring. In a human fertility study of male employees who manufacture synthetic glycerin and who would be expected to be exposed to higher levels of the material than consumers using cosmetics, there were no differences observed in sperm counts or percentage of normally shaped sperm compared with a group who did not work with glycerin.
In addition, multiple laboratory studies showed glycerin did not cause genetic mutations nor was there evidence of increased tumor incidence where both natural and synthetic glycerin were administered orally for up to two years (i.e., glycerin does not cause cancer). 


Resources:
Listing of FDA-approved OTC drug active ingredients
Search Title 21 of the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations (CFR)
EU Cosmetics Regulations










Product Types 
Baby
Bath
Eye Makeup
Facial Makeup
Fragrance
Hair Care
Hair Color
Nail
Oral Care
Personal Cleanliness
Shaving
Skin Care
Sun Protection



Resources 
History of Cosmetics
FAQs
Sustainability Report
Resources
Multimedia



About Us 
IMPORTANT LEGAL NOTICE
About Us
Privacy









                © 2023 All Rights Reserved.  Cosmeticsinfo.org
            










