Document Name: role of ADOL 62 in Massage Cream4
Document link: https://www.mountsinai.org/health-library/condition/herpes-simplex-virus



































Herpes simplex virus Information |  Mount Sinai - New York



































Toggle navigation


Toggle search



Search



Close









 





                            
                            1-800-MD-SINAI
                        

                            
                                1-800-MD-SINAI
                        




                            
                            Find a Doctor
                        

                            
                                Find a Doctor
                        




                            
                            Request an Appointment
                        

                            
                                Request an Appointment
                        





Same-Day Appointments


Request an Appointment









RAA



By Name




By Specialty







Next




Select Specialty
Acupuncture
Adolescent Medicine
Allergy and Immunology
Anesthesiology
Breast Cancer
Cancer (Oncology)
Cardiology
Cardiovascular Surgery
Dentistry
Ear, Nose, Throat (Otolaryngology)
Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism
Gastroenterology
Genetics and Genomics
Geriatric Medicine
Hematology
Infectious Disease
Internal Medicine
Nephrology
Neurological/Neurosurgery
Neurology
Obstetrics and Gynecology
Occupational Medicine
Ophthalmology
Orthopaedic / Orthopaedic Surgery
Pain Management
Pediatrics
Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
Podiatry
Preventive Medicine
Primary Care (Internal Medicine)
Psychology-PhD
Pulmonology/Sleep Medicine
Radiology
Rehabilitation and Physical Medicine
Rheumatology
Spine
Surgery
Transplant
Urology



Next














                            
                            Our Locations
                        

                            
                                Our Locations
                        



            Our Locations
            
                View More Locations




Mount Sinai Beth Israel

Mount Sinai Brooklyn

The Mount Sinai Hospital

Mount Sinai Morningside

Mount Sinai Queens

Mount Sinai South Nassau

Mount Sinai West​​​

New York Eye and Ear Infirmary of Mount Sinai

Mount Sinai Doctors Faculty Practice

The Spine Hospital at Mount Sinai

Mount Sinai Downtown Network

Mount Sinai Kravis Children's Hospital

The Mount Sinai Health Network

Urgent Care

Mount Sinai Doctors Outpatient Locations

Mount Sinai-Union Square

The Blavatnik Family Chelsea Medical Center








                            
                            Patient Care
                        

                            
                                Patient Care
                        



            Featured Services
            
                All Services




Allergy and Immunology

Cancer

Dermatology

Diabetes

Digestive Diseases - Gastroenterology

Ear, Nose and Throat

Endocrinology

Medical Genetics and Genomics

Geriatrics

Heart - Cardiology and Cardiovascular Surgery

Home Based Care

Infectious Diseases

International Services

Interventional Radiology

Liver Diseases

Lung - Pulmonology

Military Family Health Services

Music Therapy

Nephrology - Kidney Disease

Neurology

Nursing at Mount Sinai

Neurosurgery

Obstetrics and Gynecology

Ophthalmology

Orthopedics

Pain Management

Palliative Care

Pediatrics

Primary Care

Psychiatry

Radiology

Rehabilitation Medicine

Rheumatology

Social Work

Spine

Surgery

Transplantation Services

Urgent Care

Urology








                            
                            About Us
                        

                            
                                About Us
                        



            About Us
            
        



Visit Us

Mount Sinai Safety Hub

COVID-19 Facts and Resources

Our Mission

Our Leadership

Hospital Presidents

Facts and Figures

Social Media Hub

International Patient Services

Mount Sinai Today Blog

Office for Diversity and Inclusion

Patient Experience

Patient Safety

Accountable Care Organization

The Mount Sinai Health Network

Mount Sinai International

Emergency Preparedness

Careers

Newsroom

Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai

Financial Assistance

LGBT- GNB Health

Insurance Information

Language & Communication Access Services

Medical Records

Awards and Accreditations

Road Map for Action to Address Racism

Contact Us

Medical Staff Services Department

Medication Access Program

MyMountSinai® App

Mount Sinai Center for Asian Equity and Professional Development

Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion

Preparing for Surgery and Major Procedures

Mount Sinai Staff Resources

Quality and Regulatory Affairs

Digital Patient Tools and Resources

Mount Sinai Hospitals Map App











Search



Close







 






1-800-MD-SINAI1-800-MD-SINAI


MyMountSinai® App


MyChart


Pay My Bill


For Physicians


Same-Day Appointments


Make a Gift

















Share



Facebook




Twitter




Linkedin




Email





Home
Health Library












Herpes simplex virus
Cold sores



Share












Signs and Symptoms


HSV-1Small, painful, fluid-filled blisters around the lips or edge of the mouthTingling or burning around the mouth or nose, often a few days before blisters appearFeverSore throatSwollen lymph nodes in neck HSV-2Tingling sensation in the genitalia, buttocks, and thighsSmall red blisters or open sores on genitals or inner thighs; in women, often occur inside the vaginaMay be painful or notIn women, vaginal dischargeFever, muscle achesHeadachePainful urinationSwollen lymph glands in the groin 




Causes


HSV-1 is spread through saliva. Kissing, using the same eating utensils, sharing personal items (such as a razor), and receiving oral sex from someone who has HSV-1 can cause you to contract the virus. HSV-2 is sexually transmitted.Until recently, scientists assumed that HSV-1 infections were not sexually transmitted. Now, scientists know that either type can be found in either the oral or genital area, as well as at other sites. In fact, researchers estimate that HSV-1 is responsible for up to half of all new cases of genital herpes.To infect people, HSV-1 and HSV-2 must get into the body through broken skin or a mucous membrane, such as inside the mouth or in the genital area. In addition to the fluid from fever blisters, each virus can be carried in bodily fluids like saliva, semen, and fluid in the female genital tract.Both herpes viruses may cause genital infections, and both can be contagious even if the infected person does not have active symptoms or visible blisters.Also, a mother can pass the infection to her baby during vaginal birth, especially if there are active blisters around the vagina at the time of delivery.




Risk Factors


Oral herpes (cold sores)Everyone is at risk for oral herpes from HSV-1. In fact, studies suggest that by adolescence, 62% of Americans are infected with HSV-1. By the time people are in their 60s, up to 85% have been infected.Genital herpesAll sexually active people are at risk for genital herpes. Having multiple sexual partners puts you at even greater risk. Women have a greater risk of being infected after sex with an unprotected partner than men do, about 1 in 4 women have HSV-2, compared to 1 in 8 men. Estimates of how many Americans are infected range from 20 to 30%. HSV-2 is 3 times higher among HIV-infected adults compared to the general population. There is also a very high prevalence and incidence of HSV-2 infection among adolescents, compared to the general population.Other factorsPeople with weakened immune systems, such as people with HIV/AIDS, or those who take immunosuppressant drugs to treat an autoimmune disease or because of organ transplant, are at increased risk for severe cases of herpes.




Diagnosis


Often your doctor is able to make the diagnosis of herpes from examining you. If your doctor is not 100% certain, however, your doctor may take a sample from the blisters to test for the virus. Finally, there is a blood test that may help make a diagnosis, especially if your doctor suspects herpes but you do not have an active infection.




Preventive Care


HSV-1Avoiding kissing people with visible core sores.DO NOT share personal items.Wash your hands frequently.If you have HSV-1, be careful touching your eyes and genitals. DO NOT perform oral sex on your partner.Use sunscreen.Reduce stress. HSV-2Avoid having sex if you or your partner has an outbreak or active infection of herpes. Herpes outbreaks are not always obvious and your partner may be contagious without you knowing it. Anyone involved in an ongoing sexual relationship with a partner infected with HSV-2 should get counseling from a health care practitioner on how to stay safe.Avoid touching the sores.Use or have your partner use a latex condom, even when sores are not visible.Limit the number of sex partners.Use a water-based lubricant to prevent friction during sex, which can irritate the skin and increase the risk of outbreaks. 




Treatment Approach


There is no cure for herpes, so the goals of treatment are to reduce the number of outbreaks and to lessen symptoms when you do have an outbreak.Cold sores usually go away by themselves within 2 to 3 weeks, however, they can last for up to 6 weeks. Using medications may shorten the outbreak and decrease discomfort.Antiviral medications for genital herpes can reduce outbreaks and help speed recovery when an outbreak does happen. They can also reduce the chances of spreading the virus.Coping with the emotional and social aspects of having genital herpes is part of treatment. Relaxation techniques and support groups can help.LifestyleFor cold sores, applying either heat or cold to blisters may help relieve pain. Try ice or warm compresses.For genital herpes, wear cotton underwear and avoid tight fitting clothes as they can restrict air circulation and slow the healing of lesions.Be sure to tell your partner or potential partner that you have herpes.MedicationsAntiviral medications may help shorten the length of a herpes outbreak and cut down on recurring outbreaks. These treatments can reduce outbreaks by up to 80%. For genital herpes, there are two types of therapy: EpisodicSuppressive With episodic therapy, you take medication at the first sign of an outbreak and for several days to shorten the length or prevent a full outbreak. With suppressive therapy, you may take medication daily to keep outbreaks from happening. Antiviral medications include:Acyclovir (Zovirax)Famciclovir (Famvir)Valacyclovir (Valtrex) Topical medications (for oral herpes), include the antiviral cream Penciclovir (Denavir) and an over-the-counter cream, docosanol (Abreva).Nutrition and Dietary SupplementsBecause supplements may have side effects or interact with medications, you should take them only under the supervision of a knowledgeable health care provider.Lysine. Several studies suggest that lysine may help reduce the number of recurring outbreaks of cold sores. A few studies also suggest that lysine may help shorten the length of an outbreak. Taking lysine supplements or getting more lysine in your diet (from foods like fish, chicken, eggs, and potatoes) may speed recovery and reduce the chance of recurrent breakouts of the herpes infection. If you have high cholesterol, heart disease, or high triglycerides (fats in the blood), ask your doctor before taking lysine because animal studies suggest that it may raise cholesterol and triglyceride levels. Lysine can increase the amount of calcium your body absorbs, so avoid high doses of calcium while taking lysine. Usually high doses of lysine are taken only for a short time.Propolis. A resin made by bees, propolis is loaded with antioxidants that help fight infection and boost immune function. Test tube studies show it can stop HSV-1 and HSV-2 from reproducing. One small study of people with genital herpes compared an ointment made from propolis to Zovirax ointment. People using propolis saw the lesions heal faster than those using topical Zovirax. In another study, a 3% propolis ointment helped reduce the duration and pain or cold sores in some people. More studies are needed to say for sure whether propolis works. People with asthma and those allergic to bee products should not use propolis.Zinc. In test tubes, zinc is effective against HSV-1 and HSV-2. In one small study, people who applied zinc oxide cream to cold sores saw them heal faster than those who applied a placebo cream. In another study, people who used a proprietary topical formulation with zinc oxide, l-lysine, and 14 other ingredients saw a decrease in symptoms and duration of lesions. High doses of zinc can be dangerous. Zinc may interact with some antibiotics and with cisplatin, a chemotherapy drug. HerbsThe use of herbs is a time-honored approach to strengthening the body and treating disease. Herbs, however, can trigger side effects and can interact with other herbs, supplements, or medications. For these reasons, you should take herbs with care, under the supervision of a health care practitioner.Lemon balm (Melissa officinalis). Several studies suggest that topical ointments containing lemon balm may help heal cold sores. In one study, for example, people who applied lemon balm cream to their lip sores saw a reduction in redness and swelling after 2 days.Aloe (Aloe vera). Preliminary evidence suggests that aloe gel used topically may improve the symptoms of genital herpes in men. In 2 studies, men who used the aloe vera cream (0.5% aloe) saw lesions heal faster than those who used a placebo cream. It is not known whether aloe vera would also help heal cold sores.Rhubarb cream (Rheum palmatum). In one Swiss study, a topical cream made from sage (Salvia officinalis) and rhubarb was as effective as Zovirax in healing cold sores. Sage by itself was not beneficial. More research is needed.Eleutherococcus or Siberian ginseng (Eleutherococcus senticosus/Acanthopanax senticosus.). Although not all studies agree, one 6-month study of 93 people with genital herpes found that Siberian ginseng reduced the frequency, severity, and duration of outbreaks. People with high blood pressure, certain heart conditions; diabetes; obstructive sleep apnea; hormone-related cancers such as breast cancer, ovarian cancer, or uterine cancer; narcolepsy (frequent day time sleeping); mania; or who are pregnant or breastfeeding should not take Siberian ginseng. Siberian ginseng interacts with a number of medications, including digoxin (Lanoxin), lithium, diazepam (Valium), cyclobenzaprine (Flexeril), fluvoxamine (Luvox), imipramine (Tofranil), olanzapine (Zyprexa), propranolol (Inderal), theophylline (Slo-bid, Theo-Dur, others), lithium, and others. Siberian ginseng can increase the risk of bleeding, especially if you take blood thinners, such as warfarin (Coumadin), clopidogrel (Plavix), or aspirin.Peppermint oil (Mentha x piperita). In test tubes, peppermint oil has stopped a number of viruses from reproducing, including herpes. However, it is not known whether peppermint oil, applied topically, would have any effect on the herpes virus in humans. HomeopathyAlthough few studies have examined the effectiveness of specific homeopathic therapies, professional homeopaths may consider the remedies described below for the treatment of herpes based on their knowledge and experience. One study of 53 people with genital herpes found that those who were treated with homeopathy experienced improvement in their symptoms and were less likely to have recurrent outbreaks. Participants in this study were followed for up to 4 years.Before prescribing a remedy, homeopaths take into account a person's constitutional type. A constitutional type is defined as a person's physical, emotional, and psychological makeup. An experienced homeopath assesses all of these factors when determining the most appropriate remedy for each individual.For cold sores:Natrum muriaticum. For eruptions at the corners of the mouth that occur during periods of emotional stress and tend to worsen in the daytime.Rhus toxicodendron. For eruptions consisting of many small blisters that itch intensely at night.Mercurius. For children who drool and may have a fever.Sepia. For outbreaks that do not improve with other homeopathic remedies. This remedy is most appropriate for individuals who tend to have a lack of energy and do not tolerate cold weather. For genital lesions:Graphites. For large, itchy lesions in individuals who are overweight.Natrum muriaticum. For eruptions that occur during periods of emotional stress and symptoms that tend to worsen in the daytime.Petroleum. For lesions that spread to anus and thighs. Symptoms tend to worsen in winter and improve in summer.Sepia. For outbreaks that do not improve with other homeopathic remedies. This remedy is most appropriate for individuals who tend to have a lack of energy and do not tolerate cold weather. Mind-Body MedicineSupport groups. Having genital herpes can impact your social and emotional life. In fact, if you have herpes, it is common to feel depressed, angry, and even guilty. Worrying about possible rejection by someone with whom you want to be intimate is also common. Joining a support group where members share experiences and problems can help relieve the stresses associated with having genital herpes. If you are in a committed relationship, seeing a couples' therapist with your partner may also help.Relaxation techniques. Using relaxation techniques, such as yoga, guided imagery, and meditation may help you feel better overall and cope with stresses related to having herpes.Self hypnosis. Self hypnosis using guided imagery may also help relieve stress. In one 6-week training program, people with frequently recurring genital herpes were able to reduce outbreaks by nearly 50% and improve their mood, including reduced feelings of depression and anxiety.Other. Individual therapy with a psychiatrist, psychologist, or social worker; and techniques such as biofeedback can help reduce emotional symptoms associated with herpes. 




Other Considerations


PregnancyPregnant women who are infected with HSV-1 or HSV-2 have a higher risk of miscarriage, premature labor, slow fetal growth, or transmission of the herpes infection to the infant during vaginal delivery. Herpes infections in newborns can be life threatening or cause disability. In women with active, recurrent herpes, antiviral medication beginning at 36 weeks gestation reduces the risk of the mom transmitting HSV to her baby. Delivery by cesarean section (C-section) is recommended to avoid infecting the baby.Special PopulationsHerpes infections contracted during delivery, from the mother to the newborn, can lead to meningitis, herpes infection in the blood, chronic skin infection, and may even be fatal.You are more likely to have severe, frequent outbreaks and to experience complications from herpes if your immune system is suppressed from:HIV or AIDSChemotherapy for cancerLong term use of high dose corticosteroidsMedications that intentionally suppress the immune system Warnings and PrecautionsIf you are diagnosed with genital herpes, you should be tested for other sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) such as chlamydia and gonorrhea.Prognosis and ComplicationsHerpes is a long-lasting infection with symptoms that come and go. The initial symptoms usually appear within 1 to 3 weeks of exposure to the virus and last 7 to 10 days (for cold sores) or 7 to 14 days (for genital lesions). Usually the number of outbreaks is greatest in the first year and higher for HSV-2 genital lesions than HSV-1 cold sores. Each year after that, the number of outbreaks usually goes down and they become less severe. Still, once you have been infected, you can never completely get rid of the virus.Complications of herpes include:Herpetic keratitis. Herpes infection of the eye leading to scarring within the cornea and possible blindness.Persistent herpes infection, without lesion-free periodsHerpes infection in the esophagusHerpes infection of the liver which can lead to cirrhosis (liver failure)Encephalitis and/or meningitis (serious brain infections)Lung infectionEczema herpetiform, widespread herpes across the skin 




Supporting Research


Allen P. Tea tree oil: the science behind the antimicrobial hype. Lancet. 2001;358(9289):1245.Ames M. Herpes: Comprehensive treatment strategy. Int J Integra Med. 2000;2(5):6-9.Anzivino E, Fioriti D, Mischitelli M, Bellizzi A, Barucca V, Chiarini F, Pietropaolo V. Herpes simplex virus infection in pregnancy and in neonate: status of art of epidemiology, diagnosis, therapy, and prevention. Virol. 2009;6:40.Beauman JG. Genital herpes: a review. Am Fam Physician. 2005 Oct 15;72(8):1527-34. Review.Binns SE, Hudson J, Merali S, Arnason JT. Antiviral activity of chacterized extracts from Echinacea spp. (Heliantheae: Asteraceae) against herpes simplex virus (HSV-I). Planta Med. 2002;68(9):780-3.Carson CF, Ashton L, Dry L, Smith DW, Riley TV. Melaleuca alternifolia (tea tree) oil gel (6%) for the treatment of recurrent herpes labialis. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2001;48(3):450-1.Fiore C, Eisenhut M, Krausse R, Ragazzi E, Pellati D, Armanini D, Bielenberg J. Antiviral effects of Glycyrrhiza species. Phytother Res. 2007 Sep 20; [Epub ahead of print].Fried RG. Nonpharmacologic treatments in psychodermatology. Dermatol Clinics. 2002;20910;177-85.Gaby AR. Natural remedies for Herpes simplex. Altern Med Rev. 2006 Jun;11(2):93-101. Review.Godfrey HR, Godfrey NJ, Godfrey JC, Riley D. A randomized clinical trial on the treatment of oral herpes with topical zinc oxide/glycine. Altern Ther Health Med. 2001;7(3):49-56.Gruzelier JH. A review of the impact of hypnosis, relaxation, guided imagery and individual differences on aspects of immunity and health. Stress. 2002;5(2):147-63.Hoheisel O. The effects of Herstat (3% propolis ointment ACF ) application in cold sores: a double-blind placebo-controlled clinical trial. Journal of Clinical Research. 2001;4:65-75.Huleihel M, Isanu V. Anti-herpes simplex virus effect of an aqueous extract of propolis. Isr Med Assoc J. 2002;4(11 Suppl):923-7.Jakob NJ, Lenhard T, Schnitzler P, et al. Herpes simplex virus enephalitis despite normal cell count in the cerebrospinal fluid. Crit Care Med. 2012;40(4):1304-8.Jenaer M, Henry MF, Garcia A, Marichal B. Evaluation of 2LHERP in preventing recurrences of genital herpes. Institut International 3IDI. Br Homeopath J. 2000;89(4):174-7.Koch C, Reichling J, Schneele J, Schnitzler P. Inhibitory effect of essential oils against herpes simplex virus type 2. Phytomedicine. 2007 Oct 30; [Epub ahead of print].Kumar V, Abbas AK, Fausto N, Aster, J. Robbins & Cotran Pathologic Basis of Disease. 8th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders Elsevier; 2010.Lin K. Transmission of Herpes Simplex Virus via Oral Sex. American Family Physician. 2006;73(7).L-lysine. Monograph. Altern Med Rev. 2007 Jun;12(2):169-72.Marcason W. Will taking the amino acid supplement lysine prevent or treat the herpes simplex virus? J Am Diet Assoc. 2003;103(3):351.Okuku HS, Sanders EJ, Nyiro J, et al. Factors associated with herpes simplex virus type 2 incidence in a cohort of human immunodeficiency virus type 1-seronegative Kenyan men and women reporting high-risk sexual behavior. Sex Transm Dis. 2011;38(9):837-44.Patel P, Bush T, Mayer KH, et al. Prevalence and risk factors associated with herpes simplex virus-2 infection in a contemporary cohort of HIV-infected persons in the United States. Sex Transm Dis. 2012;39(2):154-60.Pinninti S, Kimberlin D. Neonatal Herpes Simplex Virus Infection. Pediatric Clinics of North America. Philadelphia, PA: W.B. Saunders Company. 2013;60(2).Rotblatt M, Ziment I. Evidence-Based Herbal Medicine. Philadelphia, PA: Hanley & Belfus, Inc; 2002:249-51.Saller R, Buechi S, Meyrat R, Schmidhauser C. Combined herbal preparation for topical treatment of Herpes labialis. Forsch Komplementarmed Klass Naturheilkd. 2001;8(6):373-82.Schnitzler P, Nolkemper S, Stintzing FC, Reichling J. Comparative in vitro study on the anti-herpetic effect of phytochemically characterized aqueous and ethanolic extracts of Salvia officinalis grown at two different locations. Phytomedicine. 2007 Dec 7; [Epub ahead of print].Schnitzler P, Schon K, Reichling J. Antiviral activity of Australian tea tree oil and eucalyptus oil against herpes simplex virus in cell culture. Pharmazie. 2001;56(4):343-7.Singh BB, Udani J, Vinjamury Sp, et al. Safety and effectiveness of an L-lysine, zinc, and herbal-based product on the treatment of facial and circumoral herpes. Altern Med Rev. 2005;10:123-7.Sudenga SL, Kempf MC, McGwin G, Wilson CM, Hook EW, Shrestha S. Incidence, prevalence, and epidemiology of herpes simplex virus-2 in HIV-1-positive and HIV-1-negative adolescents. Sex Transm Dis. 2012;39(4):300-5.Tomblin FA Jr, Lucas KH. Lysine for management of herpes labialis. Am J Health Syst Pharm. 2001;58(4):298-300, 304.Vynograd N, Vynograd I, Sosnowski Z. A comparative multi-centre study of the efficacy of propolis, acyclovir, and placebo in the treatment of genital herpes (HSV). Phytomedicine. 2000;7(1):1-6.









Find a Doctor
Request an Appointment








MyMountSinai®App
Manage your health care on the go



Download





Related Articles




Aloe





Echinacea





Lemon balm





Pau d'arco





Peppermint





Siberian ginseng





Lysine





Spirulina





Zinc





Acupuncture





Biofeedback





Herbal medicine





Homeopathy





Hypnotherapy





Massage





Mind-body medicine





Nutrition





Relaxation techniques





Traditional Chinese medicine





Yoga



Show More




















LinkedIn





Facebook





Twitter





Youtube





Instagram





Pinterest






COVID-19 Staff Resources


Mount Sinai Today Blog


1-800-MD-SINAI1-800-MD-SINAI









            
                
                
                    
                        
                            
                                Patient Information
                            
                        
                        
                    
                
            
        

MyMountSinai® App


Pay My Bill


No Surprises Act


International Services


 Mount Sinai Access


Find a Doctor


Check Symptoms & Get Care


Patient Representatives Offices


Language and Accessibility


Health Library


Clinical Trials 


Newsroom







            
                
                
                    
                        
                            
                                Research & Education
                            
                        
                        
                    
                
            
        

Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai


Medical Education


Graduate Education


Research


Find Faculty


Phillips School of Nursing







            
                
                
                    
                        
                            
                                For Health Professionals
                            
                        
                        
                    
                
            
        

Transfer a Patient 


Mount Sinai Connect


Refer a Patient


Nursing


Hospital Sponsored Programs


Medical Staff Services











Choose A Location


Hospitals


Urgent Care/Walk-In





Choose a location
Mount Sinai Beth IsraelMount Sinai BrooklynThe Mount Sinai HospitalMount Sinai MorningsideMount Sinai QueensMount Sinai South NassauMount Sinai West New York Eye and Ear Infirmary of Mount SinaiMount Sinai-Union Square




Choose a location
Mount Sinai-Union Square Urgent CareMount Sinai Doctors-Urgent Care & Multispecialty, Upper West SideMount Sinai Doctors-Urgent Care & Multispecialty, InwoodMount Sinai Doctors West 23rd StreetMount Sinai Doctors East 34th StreetMount Sinai Doctors-Urgent Care, Brooklyn HeightsMount Sinai Express Care at The Mount Sinai Hospital











©2023 Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai




Contact Us


Careers


Terms & Conditions 


Privacy Policy 


HIPAA Privacy Practices


Compliance


Non-Discrimination Notice


Patient Responsibilities


Insurance Information


Vendors

























close×









close×









