Document Name: role of ADOL 62 in Massage Cream0
Document link: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6360964/


















Adult female acne: a guide to clinical practice - PMC































          Back to Top
        
Skip to main content






An official website of the United States government

Here's how you know








The .gov means it’s official.

            Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before
            sharing sensitive information, make sure you’re on a federal
            government site.
          






The site is secure.

            The https:// ensures that you are connecting to the
            official website and that any information you provide is encrypted
            and transmitted securely.
          















Log in



Show account info





Close
Account


						Logged in as:
username



Dashboard
Publications
Account settings
Log out








Access keys
NCBI Homepage
MyNCBI Homepage
Main Content
Main Navigation

























Search PMC Full-Text Archive





Search in PMC







                            Advanced Search
                        



                            User Guide
                        











Journal List


An Bras Dermatol


v.94(1); Jan-Feb 2019


                    PMC6360964
                





Other Formats

PubReader
PDF (596K)



Actions



Cite





Collections



Add to Collections







Create a new collection



Add to an existing collection






        Name your collection:
      


        Name must be less than  characters
      



        Choose a collection:
      



        Unable to load your collection due to an error
Please try again





      Add
    

      Cancel
    










Share

 
 




 




                                Permalink
                              


Copy








RESOURCES




                        Similar articles
                    







                        Cited by other articles
                    







                        Links to NCBI Databases
                    















Journal List


An Bras Dermatol


v.94(1); Jan-Feb 2019


                    PMC6360964
                



    As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with,
    the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health.
    
        Learn more about our disclaimer.
    





An Bras Dermatol. 2019 Jan-Feb; 94(1): 62–75.  doi: 10.1590/abd1806-4841.20198203PMCID: PMC6360964PMID: 30726466Adult female acne: a guide to clinical practice*Edileia Bagatin,1,2 Thais Helena Proença de Freitas,3,4 Maria Cecilia Rivitti Machado,5,6 Beatriz Medeiros Ribeiro,7 Samanta Nunes,8 and  Marco Alexandre Dias da Rocha9Edileia Bagatin
1 Department of Dermatology, Escola Paulista de Medicina,
Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo (SP), Brazil.
2 Program of Post-Graduation in Translational Medicine, Escola
Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo
(SP), Brazil.Find articles by Edileia BagatinThais Helena Proença de Freitas
3 Dermatology Service, Hospital da Santa Casa de São Paulo,
Brazil.
4 Dermatology Clinic, Departamento de Clínica Médica,
Santa Casa de São Paulo, São Paulo (SP), Brazil.Find articles by Thais Helena Proença de FreitasMaria Cecilia Rivitti Machado
5 Department of Dermatology, Hospital das Clínicas, Faculdade
de Medicina, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo (SP), Brazil.
6 Discipline of Dermatology, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade
Metropolitana de Santos, Santos (SP), Brazil.Find articles by Maria Cecilia Rivitti MachadoBeatriz Medeiros Ribeiro
7 Dermatology Service, Hospital Regional da Asa Norte, Secretaria de
Saúde do Distrito Federal, Brasília (DF), Brazil.Find articles by Beatriz Medeiros RibeiroSamanta Nunes
8 Corium Dermatologia, São Paulo (SP), Brazil.Find articles by Samanta NunesMarco Alexandre Dias da Rocha
9 Service of Cosmiatry, Department of Dermatology, Escola Paulista de
Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo (SP),
Brazil.Find articles by Marco Alexandre Dias da RochaAuthor information Article notes Copyright and License information Disclaimer
1 Department of Dermatology, Escola Paulista de Medicina,
Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo (SP), Brazil.
2 Program of Post-Graduation in Translational Medicine, Escola
Paulista de Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo
(SP), Brazil.
3 Dermatology Service, Hospital da Santa Casa de São Paulo,
Brazil.
4 Dermatology Clinic, Departamento de Clínica Médica,
Santa Casa de São Paulo, São Paulo (SP), Brazil.
5 Department of Dermatology, Hospital das Clínicas, Faculdade
de Medicina, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo (SP), Brazil.
6 Discipline of Dermatology, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade
Metropolitana de Santos, Santos (SP), Brazil.
7 Dermatology Service, Hospital Regional da Asa Norte, Secretaria de
Saúde do Distrito Federal, Brasília (DF), Brazil.
8 Corium Dermatologia, São Paulo (SP), Brazil.
9 Service of Cosmiatry, Department of Dermatology, Escola Paulista de
Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo (SP),
Brazil.Mailing address: Samanta Nunes. E-mail:
moc.em@atnamas.senunReceived 2018 Feb 18; Accepted 2018 Jun 10.Copyright notice This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial No Derivative License, which
permits unrestricted non-commercial use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium provided the original work is properly cited and the work is not
changed in any way.This article has been corrected. See An Bras Dermatol. 2019; 94(2): 255.AbstractBackgroundAcne in women is often associated with anxiety and depression, and may
persist from adolescence as well as manifest for the first time in
adulthood. Genetic and hormonal factors contribute to its etiopathogenesis,
and maintenance treatment is required, usually for years, due to its
clinical evolution.ObjectiveTo develop a guide for the clinical practice of adult female acne.MethodsA team of five experts with extensive experience in acne conducted a
literature review of the main scientific evidence and met to discuss the
best practices and personal experiences to develop a guide containing
recommendations for the clinical practice of adult female acne.ResultsThe group of specialists reached consensus on the main guidelines for
clinical practice, providing detailed recommendations on clinical picture,
etiopathogenesis, laboratory investigation and treatment of adult female
acne.ConclusionDifferent from teenage acne, adult female acne presents some characteristics
and multiple etiopathogenic factors that make its management more complex.
This guide provides recommendations for best clinical practices and
therapeutic decisions. However, the authors consider that additional studies
are needed in order to provide more evidence for adult female acne to be
better understood.Keywords: Acne vulgaris, Adult, Advanced treatment, Consensus, Hormones, Hyperandrogenism, Skin, TherapeuticsINTRODUCTIONAcne affects an increasing number of adult females, impairing quality of life, with
significant negative psychological effect and social impact. Adult female acne (AFA)
is defined as one that affects women over the age of 25 and may persist continuously
or intermittently from adolescence or manifest for the first time in this period. It
is believed that genetic and hormonal factors contribute to the pathogenesis of AFA,
characterized by chronic evolution, requiring maintenance treatment, in some cases
for years.1-4In 1979, a publication showed that acne in adults over 18 years of age was relatively
common, persisting in 5% of females between the ages of 40 and 49.5 Only in 1997 did acne in adults,
older than 25 years of age, begin to gain more attention, showing that 76% of these
patients were women with a mean age of 35.5 years. Most of the cases were from
persistent acne and only 18.4% of females had late acne, starting after 25 years,
mainly due to hyperandrogenism changes.3 Other studies have confirmed that persistent acne is more common
than acne beginning in adulthood.6,7Other authors have confirmed that adult females are more affected than men in all age
groups and that acne can persist even after 50 years of age.In addition to persistent and late acne, more recently a third type has been
suggested, called recurrent acne, that is present in adolescence, improves for a
variable period of time, and returns in adulthood. There are few publications
regarding this, because current researches, despite questioning the age of onset of
acne, rarely ask the patient if acne recurred after a period in
adolescence.8 Some authors
suggest two categories of AFA: 25 to 44 years of age and over 45 years of age in the
period near menopause, but the characteristics of each group still need to be better
defined.9CLINICAL CONDITIONThe first studies showed that the AFA lesions were located mainly on the lower part
of the face, including the mandibular region, the perioral region and the chin,
conferring a U-shape, in addition to the anterior cervical region. It is
characterized by inflammatory lesions, papules and pustules, of mild to moderate
intensity, with the presence of few closed comedones or microcysts. Postinflammatory
hyperpigmentation is common and scars can occur in 20% of affected women.10 In addition, the skin may be more
sensitive than that of adolescents, with less tolerance to topical
medications.8,11
Table 1 demonstrates two clinical forms of
AFA, according to the classification of Preneau and Dreno.8Table 1Clinical forms of adult female acne CHARACTERISTICSPRODUCTION OF SEBUMInflammatory (affects 58% of females)Papules,
pustules and nodules that lead to the formation of scarsIncreased
seborrhea is not always presentRetentionalNumerous
open comedones and microcysts; small number of inflammatory
lesionsIncreased
seborrhea is always present and lesions appear all over the
faceOpen in a separate windowAdapted from: Preneau and Dreno, 20128Recently, the classic AFA location on the lower third of the face was
questioned.9 Studies have
observed cases with localization on other areas of the face and back. One study
showed that most women (89.8%) had involvement of multiple facial areas, such as the
forehead, malar region, mandibular area and temporal region, with a similar severity
spectrum to adolescents. The most common clinical presentation was mixed facial
acne, with noninflammatory and inflammatory lesions. The majority of the women
(93.7%) had comedones, and 48.4% presented lesions on the trunk and only 11.2% on
the mandibular regions.1Severity scalesIt is believed that AFA is different from juvenile acne due to its clinical
evolution.12 Scales
have been developed to validate a severity score for each type of acne and thus
ensure the best treatment. These include the GEA (Global Evaluation Acne) scale
and, more recently, the AFAST (Adult Female Acne Scoring Tool), which includes
the submandibular region evaluation, as shown in table 2.12,13Table 2AFAST rating scale for adult female acneAFAST SCALE (Adult Female Acne Scoring
Tool)Score 1: Assess the severity of acne on face (GEA
SCORE)0No acne lesions or
almost no lesionsResidual
pigmentation or erythema1Almost no
lesionsFew open or closed
comedones - Few papules2MildLess than half of
the face involved - Few comedones, papules and pustules3ModerateMore than half of
the face involved - Numerous papules, pustules, comedones and up
to a nodule4SevereEntire face -
Numerous papules, pustules, comedones and rare nodules5Very SevereVery inflammatory
on the entire face, with nodulesScore 2: Assess the severity of acne in the
submandibular zone0No
lesions - Erythema and postinflammatory hyperpigmentation1Rare
papules, pustules and/or comedones2Few
papules, pustules and/or comedones - Less than 25% of the
affected area - A nodule/cyst may be present3Numerous papules, pustules and/or comedones and at least 25% of
the affected area - Two or more nodules/cystsOpen in a separate windowAdapted from Aufret, et al, 201612ETHIOPATHOGENESISThe etiopathogenesis of acne vulgaris involves a complex interaction between the main
factors such as: genetic predisposition; androgenic hormone stimulation leading to
an increase in sebaceous secretion; alteration of the lipid composition; follicular
hyperkeratinization; bacterial colonization mainly by Propionibacterium
acnes (P. acnes) and periglandular dermal
inflammation.14 Currently,
inflammation is considered a key component and can be detected on histopathological
and immunohistochemical examination in apparently non-inflammatory acneic lesions
such as comedones and even in perilesional areas, without lesions
(subclinical).15,16The causes of AFA have not yet been fully elucidated. Several other factors have been
postulated as triggers or aggravating factors, such as: exposure to ultraviolet
radiation, stress, obesity, diet, smoking, sleep disorders, cosmetics, medications,
excessive skin washing, possible resistance to P. acnes and
endocrine deficiency diseases.1
Currently, the deficiency of the epidermal barrier function has also been reported
as a relevant change. The damage of the barrier and the consequent increase in
transepidermal water loss may be responsible for the onset of the inflammatory
cascade that constitutes the central change in the onset of acne.17,18
Figure 1 presents the main etiopathogenical
factors in AFA.Open in a separate windowFigure 1Main etiopathogenic factors of adult female acne (AFA)Source: Schema and image developed by the authors 
GeneticsGenetic predisposition has been considered an important predisposing factor,
influencing the number, size and activity of the sebaceous glands. Its influence
on hormonal control has also been observed, as well as on the process of
follicular hyperkeratinization and on innate immunity. In one study, adult women
with acne reported first-degree relatives with acne in adulthood.19HormonesThe role of androgens in the etiopathogenesis of acne vulgaris is well
established. Testosterone, Dehydroepiandrosterone Sulfate (SDHEA) and
Dihydrotestosterone (DHT) stimulate sebaceous gland growth and sebum production.
Estrogens have the opposite effect, that is, they inhibit the secretion of
androgens, modulate genes involved in the growth of the sebaceous gland and
inhibit their function. The activity of the sebaceous gland therefore depends on
the estrogen/androgen ratio.20In relation to AFA and hormones, the following are outstanding:Increased sensitivity of the sebaceous gland to androgenic hormones:
As in acne vulgaris, in AFA there is an increase in the number and
sensitivity of the receptors located in sebocytes and keratinocytes
to circulating androgenic hormones.Increased peripheral hormonal conversion: sebocytes and keratinocytes
present an enzymatic system capable of locally producing
testosterone and DHT. Hyperactivity and abnormal activity of enzymes
related to the metabolism of androgenic hormones such as 5-alpha
reductase, 3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase and 17-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase, with increased pre-hormone peripheral conversion
(SDHEA, androstenedione and testosterone) into more potent
androgenic hormones (testosterone and DHT). DHT is 5 to 10 times
more potent than its precursor, testosterone, and less likely to be
metabolized by aromatase into estrogen.20Worsening of the disease in the premenstrual period in 60 to 70% of
women, as well as in premenopausal, pregnancy and during the use of
progestin-only contraceptives. In these periods there is a relative
increase of the hormones with greater androgenic activity, in
relation to estradiol.Other hormones, besides androgens and estrogens, regulate the
production of sebum: the sebaceous gland is a neuroendocrine organ
and the production of sebum can also be stimulated, in periods of
stress, by neuropeptides and hormones such as melanocortins and
corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH).21 CRH increases the expression of
3β-hydroxy-steroid dehydrogenase mRNA, the enzyme responsible
for the conversion of dihydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) to testosterone.
Also neuropeptides, histamine, retinoids, vitamin D and insulin-like
growth factor 1 (IGF-1) have been described as regulators of sebum
production.Changes in sebumQualitative changes were verified in the components of sebum in the skin with
acne. There is a relative decrease of Linoleic Acid (AL), an Essential Fatty
Acid (EFA), protector of the glandular epithelial wall. There is also the
peroxidation of squalene by the combined action of P. acnes and
ultraviolet radiation. These alterations and the presence of free fatty acids
resulting from the hydrolysis of triglycerides, through the action of lipases
released by P. acnes, cause damage the epithelium, increasing
infundibular keratinization and dermal inflammation.14Follicular hyperkeratinizatinThere is an abnormal proliferation of keratinocytes, stimulated by
pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as interleukin-1 alpha (IL-1 alpha). This
cytokine is triggered by the activation of Toll-like receptors or TLR 2 and 4,
related to innate immunity, which recognize molecular patterns present in
P. acnes, as well as sebaceous hypersecretion and squalene
peroxidation.14 The
formation of the micro-comedone is also preceded by a mononuclear infiltrate
formed mainly by CD4+ T lymphocytes and CD68+ macrophages, which corroborates to
the hypothesis of the participation of the inflammatory process in the early
stages of acne.22Bacterial colonizationThe main bacterium involved in the pathogenesis of acne is P.
acnes. It is a Gram-positive anaerobic bacterium that makes up the
microbiome of the skin, being located preferably in the seborrheic areas. In
skin with acne there is an exaggerated growth of the population of P.
acnes.23
P. acnes is involved in several mechanisms: stimulation of
follicular hyper-keratinization; alteration of the sebaceous composition; and
inflammatory response through TLR activation. In addition, it produces several
enzymes, such as lipases, proteases, hyaluronidases, endoglyceramidase,
sialidase/neuroaminidase, proteinase and 5 cAMP factors, which contribute to
follicular rupture and tissue degradation.24Immuno-inflammatory processesUpon recognition of the P. acnes molecular patterns, TLR 2 and 4
are activated, triggering an inflammatory cascade through the nuclear pathway
NFk β, with production of pro-inflammatory cytokines or interleukins and
tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) that recruit neutrophils and
macrophages, maintaining the inflammatory cycle. Activation of TLR leads to the
release of antimicrobial peptides such as beta-defensins 1 and 2, cathelecidins
and granulolysins. A second nuclear pathway is also activated - pathway AP1,
with release of metalloproteinases 1, 3 and 9 that degrade the extracellular
dermal matrix and are associated with the formation of scars.25Other factorsDiet Studies have shown that consumption of high glycemic and dairy foods
increases insulin and IGF1 levels. The gonads and sebaceous glands have
receptors for both hormones which stimulate the production of androgens,
such as testosterone, and inhibit the action of aromatase that converts
testosterone to estradiol. The nutritional status of the cell is recognized
initially by the transcription factors FOX01 and the signaling pathway
mTORC1.26 High
glycemic load foods, dairy products, increased insulin and IGF1 stimulate
mTORC1, triggering processes such as: increased protein and lipid synthesis,
cell proliferation, cell differentiation with acroinfundibular
hyper-proliferation of keratinocytes, sebaceous gland hyperplasia, increased
sebaceous lipogenesis, insulin resistance and increased body mass
index.26 In
addition to the diet rich in foods with a high glycemic load and the
consumption of dairy products, worsening of acne by the use of dietary
supplements for muscle mass gains that are rich in branched-chain amino
acids and peptides derived from whey is observed in daily
practice.27Drugs Certain medications are associated with the development of acne, such as
benzodiazepines, lithium, cyclosporin, ramipril, isoniazid, iodides,
bromides, vitamin B-type complexes, serotonin uptake inhibitors, epidermal
growth receptor inhibitors and progestin contraceptives.28-30 First-generation progestins such as norgestrel and
levonorgestrel have androgenic effect similar to testosterone.31 Corticosteroids stimulate
hyperkeratinization and increase the expression of TLR 2.28Authors have noted that levonorgestrel intrauterine devices, subcutaneous
etonorgestrel and levonorgestrel implants, and long-acting methods with
progestin alone may have a negative effect on acne or may trigger acne in
predisposed women.32-34 A prospective study showed
that 10% of 80 women who used subcutaneous implants with etonorgestrel had
acne.33 Another
multicenter, randomized, controlled study of subcutaneous implants with
etonorgestrel or levonorgestrel compared to copper intrauterine devices
showed that acne was more frequent in the group with implants.34 However, it is important
to consider other causes for the appearance of acne in these cases, such as
the suspension of estrogen-containing oral contraceptives.32Stress Stress stimulates the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines and CRH, leading
to increased levels of cortisol. Recent studies show that sleep deprivation
associated with women’s modern lifestyle and stress have an important impact
on the hypothalamic-pituitaryadrenal axis and in increased secretion of
stress-related hormones, and may also be an aggravating factor for
acne.21 Goulden et al3 and Poli et
al35 reported
stress as a worsening factor for acne in 71% and 50% of women,
respectively.Tobacco There is a close relationship between smoking and the occurrence of
AFA.36 Studies
show that tobacco is the main factor responsible for the appearance of
non-inflammatory acne in this age group, with a significant difference
between female smokers and nonsmokers. The comedonal form predominates in
smokers and is characterized by the presence of micro and macro-comedones
and few inflammatory lesions, which led the authors to describe this
clinical form as “smoker’s face.” The sebaceous gland is sensitive to
acetylcholine that is stimulated by nicotine. Acetylcholine leads to
cellular modulation and differentiation, inducing hyper-keratinization and
influencing sebum production and composition, as well as reducing
antioxidant agents and increasing peroxidation of sebum components, such as
squalene.36Endocrine diseases The association of acne with an endocrinopathy characterized by
hyper-androgenism usually presents other clinical signs such as: hirsutism,
seborrhoea, alopecia, menstrual disorders, ovulatory dysfunction,
infertility, early puberty, metabolic syndrome and virilization.37 The main endocrinopathies
that occur with hyper-androgenism are: Polycystic ovary syndrome POS, late
congenital adrenal hyperplasia or disfunction and, more rarely, ovarian,
adrenal, pituitary and hypothalamic tumors.37Hyperinsulinemia and peripheral insulin resistance occur frequently in women
with POS. Hyperinsulinemia influences the concentration of plasma IGF-1 and
Insulin Growth Factor Binding Protein-Like 3 binding protein (IGFBP-3),
which act directly on keratinocyte proliferation and apoptosis. In a
hyperinsulinemic state, the rate of IGF-1 is elevated and IGFBP-3 is
lowered, leading to an imbalance that culminates in hyperproliferation of
keratinocytes. Increased IGF-1 also inhibits aromatase and prevents the
conversion of testosterone to estrogen. In this hyperinsulinemia, there is
still a decrease in the hepatic production of SHBG, favoring the elevation
of the free androgens that constitute its active form.37 In adult women with acne
and POS, it is important to evaluate the possibility of glucose intolerance.
In POS, total cholesterol is increased at the expense of increasing the low
density lipoprotein (LDL) fraction and decreasing the high density
lipoprotein (HDL). Triglycerides are also increased as the plasminogen
activator inhibitor (PAI) is. These changes in lipids and the increase in
PAI favor arterial hypertension, coronary disease and thrombosis.37 In women with acne,
obesity and PCOS, metabolic syndrome is very common, characterized by: 1)
abdominal obesity (circumference of the waist)> 88cm; 2)
triglycerides> 150mg / dL; 3) HDL <50mg / dL; 4) blood pressure>
130 /> 85mm Hg; 5) high glycemia = 110-126mg / dL; and glycemia two hours
after the glucose tolerance test = 140-199mg / dL.37LABORATORY INVESTIGATIONSIn the presence of other clinical signs of hyperandrogenism, most authors suggest
plasma concentrations of free and total testosterone, S-DHEA, Luteinizing Hormone
(LH), Follicle Stimulating Hormone (FSH) and, in some cases, when suspecting POS,
transvaginal ultrasound for visualization of the ovaries. These dosages should
always be performed in the follicular phase, preferably between the first and fifth
day of the menstrual cycle and the collection should be done in the morning, between
8 and 10 am. In this way, the hormonal variations of the menstrual cycle interfere
less with blood analysis. POS is the most frequently diagnosed cause. It is not
recommended to perform exams when hormonal contraceptives are in use.37In suspected POS, the following criteria should be checked: presence of menstrual
alterations (amenorrhea or oligomenorrhea), clinical and/or biochemical and/or
hyperandrogenism, as well as ultrasonographic changes (presence of 12 or more
follicles with 2 and 9 mm of diameter or increase in ovarian volume >
10cm3). In the revised consensus of 2004, the presence of two of the
three criteria confirmed the diagnosis.38 However, today the difficulty persists for the
standardization of the criteria for its precise diagnosis.39,40
Figure 2 presents a scheme for laboratory
investigation of AFA.Open in a separate windowFigure 2Laboratory investigation of adult female acne (AFA)TEST = Testosterone / POS = Polycystic Ovary Syndrome / FSH = Follicle
Stimulating Hormone / LH = Luteinizing Hormone / S-DHEA =
Dehydroepiandrosterone SulfateSource: Scheme developed by the authors
Although most AFA patients show no signs of clinical or laboratory hyperandrogenism,
slightly elevated levels of S-DHEA have been observed.41DHT could be useful as a primary marker of peripheral androgen production, but its
dosage is not recommended in clinical practice, since it is rapidly metabolized and
has high affinity for SHBG.42A distal metabolite of DHT, produced in androgen-responsive tissues, is 3-alpha,
17-beta-androstanediol glucuronate. In the final phase of metabolization, the enzyme
3α-hydroxy dehydrogenase converts DHT to 3α-androstenediol which
undergoes glucuronidation. This modification decreases its affinity for binding
proteins, increases its hydrophilicity and facilitates renal excretion.43 This metabolite can be used as a
marker of hyperandrogenism, especially in women with idiopathic hirsutism, but is
not useful in AFA.Another androgenic metabolite of interest is Androsterone Glucuronate (ADT-G), which
corresponds to 93% of all metabolites. Currently the use of sensitive and specific
laboratory techniques, such as liquid chromatography associated with mass
spectrometry, for the dosages of this metabolite, allows evaluation of the total
androgenic activity of the organism, with great accuracy, showing correlation with
the clinical findings.44TREATMENT OF ADULT FEMALE ACNEAFA is a therapeutic challenge because it presents a tendency to relapse, even after
cycles of oral antibiotics or isotretinoin.3 The typical evolution of AFA, with frequent relapses, makes
maintenance treatment essential.45In choosing the treatment, numerous factors must be taken into account: acne
severity, response to previous treatments, psychosocial impact, possibility of
pregnancy, slow response to treatment and increased risk of sensitive skin
irritation. Individual preferences and costs are also important factors.2,7 In the Brazilian population, the diversity of phototypes, with a
large contingent of patients prone to post-inflammatory hyperchromia, as well as
climatic variation limit therapeutic options, contributing to their complexity.
Figure 3 presents an algorithm for treating
AFA.Open in a separate windowFigure 3Treatment algorithm of adult female acneSource: Developed By The Authors
TOPICAL TREATMENTTopical treatments are the most widely used and effective option for treating
moderate AFA and for maintenance treatment. Tolerability and efficacy may contribute
to greater adherence to treatment, good outcomes, and patient
satisfaction.46
Therapeutic regimens employing resources directed against two or more fundamental
pathogenic factors are the main strategy in cases of mild to moderate intensity of
acne.47RetinoidsAdapalene: The efficacy and tolerability of adapalene 0.3% compared to the
vehicle in women aged 18-41 was evaluated in an analysis of data obtained in two
studies. There was a significant reduction at the 12th week (P =
0.045) of the inflammatory lesions (-61%) and non-inflammatory lesions (-51%).
The main side effects were dryness and “skin discomfort”.48 The concentration of 0.1% has
also been studied with positive results and good tolerance.49Tretinoin: Increased efficacy of AFA treatment was demonstrated when tretinoin at
0.025% concentration was associated with spironolactone. In that same study,
another group used 0.1% adapalene in cream associated with spironolactone with
similar results. Other authors have shown improvement in inflammatory acne in
adolescents and adults when using topical tretinoin at concentrations of 0.04%
to 0.1% in micro-capsulated presentations.50AntibioticsTopical antibiotics have a direct anti-inflammatory action reducing
perifollicular lymphocytic infiltrate. Due to the significant increase of
P. acnes strains resistant to clindamycin and erythromycin,
the use of these substances alone is contra-indicated.7Benzoyl peroxideIn adult women, benzoyl peroxide can induce irritative contact dermatitis or skin
dryness, the extent of which is related to the amount and type of product,
concentration, and vehicle. Therefore, concentrations of benzoyl peroxide above
5% are not recommended for use in adult women.7 It can also cause photosensitivity and bleaching
of clothing.Azelaic acidAzelaic acid 20%, applied twice a day, was evaluated in a study for the treatment
of AFA in 241 women, alone or in combination with various treatments (including
adapalene, benzoyl peroxide, cosmeceuticals, isotretinoin and oral hormonal
contraceptives). The study concluded that topical treatment improved the
Dermatology Quality of Life Index (DLQI) and reduced the severity of
acne.51 Azelaic Acid
15% gel, applied twice daily, was also effective in reducing post-inflammatory
pigmentation.52 There
was a significant reduction in the expression of TLR-2 in the skin of adult
females with facial acne who used azelaic acid 15% gel or combined oral
contraceptive (drospirenone + ethinylestradiol). The authors suggested a
possible anti-inflammatory effect of oral contraceptive and azelaic acid in AFA
via modulation of this receptor.53According to the AFA review, published in 2013, azelaic acid (20% cream or 15%
gel) is recommended as the first line of treatment in monotherapy for
non-inflammatory and inflammatory acne. Azelaic acid shows similar efficacy to
other topical therapies in the treatment of mild to moderate acne and is
associated with a favorable tolerability profile and high rates of
satisfaction.7 Finally,
it is unlikely that systemic side effects occur with azelaic acid, making it
safe for use during pregnancy and breastfeeding.7 Azelaic acid represents an important option for
women of childbearing age and with a desire to become pregnant as it is
considered safe by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).DapsoneDapsone 5% gel was used as treatment twice daily in black adult females with good
efficacy and tolerance. In patients with acne vulgaris, it has been shown to be
useful when combined with doxycycline and then alone as maintenance for long
periods, with the advantage of having no risk for bacterial
resistance.54,55AssociationsRetinoids + Benzoyl peroxide The efficacy and safety of adapalene 0.1% combined with 2.5% benzoyl peroxide
gel compared to the vehicle in women 25 years of age or older were analyzed
by meta-analysis of data extracted from subgroups from three multi-center,
phase 2 and 3, randomized, parallel and double-blind studies. A rapid onset
of action was demonstrated, with a significant reduction in lesions from the
first week of use; the combination was considered effective, safe and
tolerated well in both the population under 18 years and over 25 years, with
similar indices.46Retinoids + Antibiotics The tretinoin-clindamicyn combination has been studied for the treatment of
acne; a later analysis included only data from adult females. The
combination proved to be more effective in reducing inflammatory and
non-inflammatory lesions than the isolated tretinoin or clindamycin or the
carrier substance.56Antibiotics + Benzoyl peroxide The combination of benzoyl peroxide 3.75% + clindamycin 1.2% was studied for
long-term use (up to 24 weeks) in 20 adult females. At week 12, inflammatory
lesions decreased by 70% and non-inflammatory lesions decreased by 58%. In
the 24 th week, the improvement was 93% and 90%, respectively.
There were no serious adverse events. This study allowed to evaluate the
safety of longterm use as well as demonstrated continuous
improvement.57SYSTEMIC TREATMENTAntibioticsAdult women with facial acne have a good response to antibiotics; however,
relapses are common after discontinuation of treatment. The combination of
systemic antibiotics with topical products is recommended because it presents
synergistic effects, accelerating the response and reducing the duration of
treatment. Tetracycline and its derivatives are the first choice of antibiotics
for the treatment of AFA. Second-generation tetracyclins, such as lymecycline,
doxycycline and minocycline, are associated with better absorption when ingested
with food and better adherence, because of their single daily dose regimen. It
should be emphasized that they should not be used during pregnancy as they may
cause inhibition of skeletal fetal growth and dental changes. Erythromycin in
stearate form can be used during pregnancy and lactation.7,58Systemic antibiotics should not be used as monotherapy in the treatment of acne
for the potential of developing bacterial resistance. Benzoyl peroxide in the
concentration of 2.5 to 5% has synergistic action to antibiotics, accelerating
the response, besides avoiding the development of resistance. Azelaic acid as
well as topical retinoids are alternatives, particularly if there is
hyperchromia.7,58HormonesHormones are highly effective for AFA, even in patients without serum hormone
changes, they are suitable for long-term therapy because they have no potential
to induce bacterial resistance and represent an alternative to systemic
antibiotics. In adult females, hormonal agents are recommended in the following
situations: presence of severe seborrhea; worsening in the premenstrual period;
presence of endocrine changes; persistent recalcitrant inflammatory acne in
which standard treatments have failed, including repeated cycles of isotretinoin
and when oral contraception is required or desired. As hormone treatments reduce
excess sebum production, it is recommended that they are combined with agents
that act on other pathogenic factors, such as antibiotics, benzoyl peroxide,
retinoids, and azelaic acid.7,58Androgen receptor blockersThe most prominent are: cyproterone acetate, spironolactone, drospirenone and
flutamide.Ciproterone acetate: Combined with ethinylestradiol, it is recommended for the
treatment of mild to moderate AFA. Side effects include menstrual changes,
tenderness and enlargement of the breast, nausea, vomiting, fluid retention,
edema, headache, and melasma.7SPIRONOLACTONE: A study published by Sato et al59, demonstrated efficacy of
spironolactone in the treatment of adult females with acne vulgaris. In
monotherapy, 80% of the patients present menstrual irregularity.59 A retrospective study of
spironolactone found that there is no need for periodic control of potassium
levels in young women, who do not have nephropathies, and are not users of other
medications that may increase potassium levels.60 The combined use of spironolactone with
topical retinoid seems to provide a superior response to the retinoid treatment
isolated in AFA.61
Spironolactone can be used to promote androgen blockade in patients using
levonorgestrel intrauterine devices or to increase androgen blockade in those
who opt for combined oral contraceptive pills (OCPs).62 In these cases, doses of 100 mg daily are safe
and rarely associated with side effects.63 A systematic review published in 2017 concluded that
the evidence for its use in the treatment of AFA is still poor, its
recommendation is still based on expert opinion or consensus, and randomized,
controlled, double-blind trials for the proof of effectiveness are still
lacking.64Inhibitors of ovarian androgen productionOCPs containing ethinyl estradiol combined with progestins with antiandrogenic
activity are recommended for the treatment of mild to moderate AFA. Although the
evidence is limited and somewhat conflicting, combinations containing
cyproterone acetate may be slightly more effective than those containing newer
progestins, such as desogestrel, gestodene, levonorgestrel, or norgestimate.
Drospirenone-containing OCPs are effective in reducing inflammatory and
non-inflammatory acne lesions. Clinicians should be aware of the absolute and
relative contra-indications of OCPs prior to prescription.7 According to a systematic review
in 2014, the risk of thromboembolism with OCPs is related to both estrogen and
progestin type. Thus, the higher the estrogen concentration the greater the
risk, and for the progestins it was concluded that the second generation (more
androgenic) have a lower risk than those of the third and fourth
generations.65Inhibitors of adrenal androgen productionLow doses of corticosteroids, such as prednisone (2.5 or 5mg), can suppress
adrenal androgen production and are recommended in late congenital adrenal
hyperplasia, acute inflammatory lesions in AFA, and short-term treatment of very
severe acne.7IsotretinoinExcept for severe cases, oral isotretinoin is typically indicated only after
failure of conventional treatments. In adult females it may be recommended, with
great attention to the elevated risk of teratogenicity, making the adoption of
highly effective contraception methods mandatory. If there are no
contra-indications, it is the first line for nodulocystic acne and second line
for moderate forms not responsive to courses of oral antibiotic always
associated with topical medications and frequent recurrences, tendency to scars
and negative psychosocial impact.66,67It acts by reducing the size and activity of the sebaceous glands by apoptosis of
sebocytes; exhibits anti-inflammatory properties by modulating TLR 2 expression
and gene transcription mediated by Fox O or Forkhead Box Class O.68,69 Due to the multiple mechanisms of action, several
off-label indications have already been suggested in the literature such as AFA,
rosacea, photo-aging, seborrheic dermatitis, among others.70-74Its effectiveness is undeniable, but there are side effects. The most common are
mucocutaneous: cheilitis, xerophthalmia, conjunctivitis, nasal dryness,
epistaxis and irritative dermatitis. Laboratory abnormalities may include
elevation of liver enzymes, increase in triglyceride and cholesterol levels,
elevation of LDL fraction, and decrease in HDL fraction.75-78 Teratogenicity is the most serious and irreversible
adverse effect. Fetal exposure to isotretinoin, regardless of dose, at any time
during gestation, but especially in the first trimester, can cause serious
defects, with an incidence of approximately 28%.79The occurrence of depression, suicidal ideation or attempted suicide associated
with isotretinoin in the treatment of acne vulgaris has been reported in the
literature of case reports and case-control studies. The observed incidence
ranges from less than 1% to 3%, while in the general population it is estimated
to be between 1.6 and 7.5%, with an average of 3%.80 Numerous studies have concluded that the drug
more often determines improvement or cure of depressive symptoms that have been
proven to be related to acne and cause depression.81,82
Population studies have not confirmed this association. However, the
recommendation remains to monitor symptoms and, if necessary, request
psychiatric evaluation and treatment. It is worth remembering that in adult
females, emotional and psychic disorders, stress, insomnia, and other symptoms
are common.21The development of Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD), particularly ulcerative
colitis was related to isotretinoin. However, several population-based,
case-control studies have concluded that this association does not
exist.83,84 On the other hand, Crohn’s
disease has been reported with the use of tetracycline-class antibiotics,
particularly doxycycline and even topical treatments for acne, evidencing that
the causal factor is the disease and not the therapeutic option.85 There seems to be a
misconception about the true triggering factor. A recent meta-analysis has shown
that there is no increased risk of developing IBD after exposure to
isotretinoin.86Clinical and laboratory monitoring includes detailed history, complete physical
examination, and complementary examinations. Reassessments of hepatic lipids and
transaminases were performed monthly in the past. Considering that the
proportion of patients with laboratory abnormalities is low, particularly
adolescents, it is currently recommended to repeat the tests 4 to 6 weeks after
starting treatment and reassessments only for those who have changed.86-88 The recommended daily dose is 0.5 to 1.0mg / kg, after
meals (preferably fatty), for a period of 6 to 12 months, up to a total dose of
120 to 150mg/kg.66,67There are reports of use of lower daily doses, without the need to reach the
total dose of 120mg/kg body weight. The benefits of regimens with 0.3 to
0.4mg/kg/day, 20mg/day, 20mg every other day, 5mg/day, in the treatment of
moderate acne, with the same efficacy, fewer side effects and greater adherence
to treatment.89-91 However, this is not
recommended for use in leaflets. These regimens may be a useful option for AFA
resistant to topical and hormonal treatments by reducing adverse events.
However, effective prevention of pregnancy is necessary since these women may be
of childbearing age and the risk of teratogenicity is equal to the use at usual
doses.79 To begin
treatment in women of childbearing age, it is necessary to inform of the risks,
the need for two contraceptive methods, pregnancy tests and to wait for
menstruation. In adult females, particularly those with overweight tendency or
obese, or with hormonal changes, more frequent laboratory monitoring becomes
essential. There has been an increased risk of elevated cholesterol and
triglycerides and weight gain.92,93 No changes
were detected in serum androgens and insulin.93Adult women with hyperandrogenism often require more than one course of treatment
with isotretinoin, in addition to hormones. One measure that may contribute to
avoid recurrence is maintenance therapy with adapalene, benzoyl peroxide, or
azelaic acid for 6 months to 2 years.94 A risk of relapse that is 3.5 times greater has been
reported in women who did not use concomitant anti-androgen therapy.95Adjuvant treatmentsCosmeceuticals and cosmetics The topical and systemic treatment for acne can cause dryness, irritation,
damage to the epidermal barrier, increased transepidermal water loss and
inflammation, and may reduce adhesion. Moisturizers may contribute to reduce
these adverse events of topical products and oral isotretinoin by avoiding
the impairment of the epidermal barrier that is essential to prevent or
reduce inflammation.7,96,97Many authors consider that because cosmeceuticals are available without
prescription and medical supervision, there may be harm in educating
patients about their dermatoses (such as acne). Intensive advertising is
highly targeted at adult females and may induce them to self-medication with
ineffective and skin-irritating products, as well as causing delay in
seeking suitable dermatological care, increasing the risk of continuation.
In addition, data on acne efficacy is limited and information presented by
companies is much more based on in vitro research than in
randomized controlled trials of finished products.98Acne cosmeceuticals include cleansing agents for oily or sensitive skin,
sebaceous secretion regulators, anti-inflammatory drugs, moisturizers and
sunscreens (useful for preventing post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation).
Clinical data on retinoids retinol, retinaldehyde, retinyl ester, adapalene
0.1%, niacinamide (active form, amide, niacin or nicotinic acid or vitamin
B3) and glycolic acid in concentrations of 5 to 20% indicate that they may
be useful in the initial, mild to moderate forms of acne, particularly
comedonal and accompanied by increased seborrhea. They are not superior to
medicines for these forms and there is no data for severe acne.99 Niacinamide may be useful
for antimicrobial, sebostatic, anti-inflammatory effects, inhibition of
melanosome transfer, increased synthesis of ceramides, inhibition of nitric
oxide and consequent changes in capillary permeability.100As some anti-acne agents may cause skin dryness, erythema and discomfort,
moisturizers and cleansing agents (preferably soapfree and near-skin pH) are
recommended as an essential part of the therapeutic regimen in
AFA.7 It is
necessary to add photo-protection with non-comedogenic products capable of
also providing comfort and hydration. In certain climatic conditions the use
of moisturizer may be crucial for adherence to treatment, counteracting
dryness and improving the barrier function of the stratum corneum.97Glycolic acid is the alpha-hydroxy acid most used in the treatment of acne
and hyperpigmentation, as it quickly crosses the stratum corneum, reaches
the lower layers of the epidermis and the hair follicles reducing the
cohesion between the keratinocytes. It is considered useful in reducing the
size of follicular ostia and in removing comedones.101 A topical combination
containing 10.4% L-lactic acid, 2% salicylic acid and alpha-hydroxy
acid/retinoate conjugate (ethyl lactyl retinoate) was used in the topical
treatment of females of ages 20 to 58. After 4 weeks, improvement was
achieved, which remained continuous and cumulative in the eighth
week.102A formulation containing 0.1% retinaldehyde and 6% glycolic acid was studied
for concomitant use with other acne treatments (except retinoids) and has
been shown to be tolerable. Authors commented on the possibility of using
this formulation as monotherapy in mild to moderate acne.103Among cosmetics, corrective makeup and camouflage are useful and should be
part of the therapeutic regimen as they improve the quality of life,
contribute to sun protection and reduce the habit of inconsistency, very
common in females. Obvious facial injuries are a very important problem for
women. Well-targeted use of cosmeceuticals and cosmetics can benefit drug
treatment by reducing side effects, reducing the need for topical
antibiotics, and improving adherence to the therapeutic regimen.97,104Mechanical procedures Intralesional infiltration with corticosteroid: The corticosteroid of choice
for this minimally invasive procedure is triamcinolone acetonide. It is
indicated in nodulocystic acne, in a concentration of 2.5mg/mL, diluted in
distilled water, in single application, with improvement in 48 to 72 hours.
In the presence of multiple lesions, 5mg per application should not be
exceeded to avoid systemic absorption.105 It is useful in the treatment of inflammatory
nodules, even during the use of oral isotretinoin, since it accelerates
regression and relieves pain rapidly in these lesions. It is also indicated
in the approach of hypertrophic and keloid scars, with total or partial
regression.66,106Manual extraction of comedones: Removal of comedones, particularly open ones,
may be useful by unclogging the follicular opening, facilitating the
penetration of topical keratolytic products and contributing to the
reduction of inflammation. In addition, it provides a positive impact on the
quality of life, prevents the manipulation of the lesions in an inadequate
way by the patient and/ or laymen.66Eletrocauterization of macro-comedones: The electrocautery of closed
macro-comedones should be performed with great care not to reach excessive
depth and cause scarring. It is useful since macro-comedones frequently
evolve to inflammatory lesions. In addition, it avoids manipulation that
causes exulcerations and inflammation.66Draining of cysts and abscesses: It is a necessary procedure when there is
fluctuation in these lesions, associated with the use of oral antibiotics,
because it reduces the period of evolution and the scarring development.Microdermabrasion: Microdermabrasion is a very superficial exfoliation method
equivalent to a superficial peeling. It is based on the blasting of aluminum
crystals until the appearance of mild erythema. After 2 to 3 days there is a
fine peeling. The advantage over chemical peels is lack of burning, but the
result may be poorer. It is most indicated in the preparation of the skin
for the treatment of superficial atrophic scars. It is a simple, safe
procedure and when carried out serially in several weekly sessions can
induce reorganization and increase the density of dermal collagen.66,107Chemical peels, lights and lasers The superficial chemical peels have keratolytic action, causing superficial
exfoliation due to its epidermal effects that are useful for comedonal and
mild inflammatory forms. The most commonly used agents in the treatment of
active acne are Jessner’s solution, 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) or 20% in
aqueous solution, 30% salicylic in hydro-alcoholic solution or polyethylene
glycol, 70% glycolic or other gel concentrations of natrosol, with partially
buffered pH and 50% pyruvic acid. Salicylic and pyruvic acids have
demonstrated a significant reduction in sebum content in the skin with acne
through sebummetry.108
Several comparative studies have shown similar efficacy among the agents,
with varying differences in tolerability.109 All can cause burning, erythema and
desquamation after 3 to 5 days, lasting from 7 to 15 days. Unpredictable
immediate reactions may occur, particularly with glycolic acid, which
requires more care and observation of symptoms and signs until their
removal. Such reactions include edema, vesiculation and undesirable
bleaching due to epidermolysis. In this situation, immediate neutralization
with 10% sodium bicarbonate in aqueous solution and removal of the agent
should be performed. In general, they are safe procedures, without late
complications; except when exaggerated, unpredictable immediate reactions
occur that may cause post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation.The average peels are performed with the combination of a keratolytic agent -
Jessner’s solution (no removal) or 70% glycolic acid (removed as soon as
there is mild burning or the appearance of erythema) - and TCA 35% in
aqueous solution applied immediately after. They are indicated for the
treatment of superficial atrophic scars in isolated semi-annual applications
or associated with other procedures at different times, particularly when
they are deep.106,110,111 In this situation, the peel acts as a
preparation of the skin, making its surface more homogeneous.The application of blue or red light emitting diodes (LEDs) has an
anti-inflammatory effect faster than topical and/or systemic treatments. One
study showed that this effect was similar to salicylic acid peel. The
associated lights in the early stages of treatment improved inflammation and
adhesion. No adverse event has been recorded.112 Photodynamic Therapy (PDT), as it is
better known, has been proposed as a therapeutic option for acne, although
with many doubts and scanty evidence.113A review of randomized, controlled studies of light-based therapies for acne
treatment concluded that none of the studies demonstrated efficacy; it is
necessary to carry out well-designed studies that employ standardized
outcome measures as well as comparison with usual drug treatments.114At the moment there is no laser technology whose target is the sebaceous
gland and that can destroy it, leading to healing. Two suggestions have been
discussed. One associates an integrated cooling and vacuum system applied to
the skin followed by the application of 3 to 4 pulses of the 1540-nm
medium-erbium: glass infrared laser. An open, uncontrolled study including
12 patients with mild to moderate acne used this method in 4 to 6 sessions,
with a 2-week interval. The improvement scores were 3.6 and 2.0, on a scale
of 0 to 4, after one and 3 months of the last session, without adverse
events.115
Another recently developed method is the use of a suspension of inert gold
micro-particles with silica center applied with 8-minute massage on the face
followed by 800nm laser application. There are 3 sessions, with intervals of
2 weeks. There are reports of improvement of up to 61% of inflammatory
lesions.116Scars Acute atrophic acne scars can be treated with minimally invasive procedures
such as medium chemical peels, hyaluronic acid and L-poly-lactic acid
fillers, and non-ablative radiofrequency.117 The most severe, which may be
persistent, have a negative impact on the quality of life and pose a
therapeutic challenge. The treatment is always prolonged and requires an
association of techniques, including surgical removal of areas with intense
atrophy, in several sessions.117-119 The
most invasive procedures include: sub-incision, punch lift, dermabrasion,
fractional CO2 laser or Erbium: Yag, ablative or non-ablative,
microneedling, and radiofrequency, among others. The most commonly mentioned
are the medium peels, various types of lasers and, more recently,
microneedling.109,118-121 Studies with histological evaluation
after fractionated CO2 laser treatment showed thickening of the
epidermis, disappearance of degenerated elastic fibers, increased elastic
fiber density and dermal collagen.119,120 These
effects, in addition to treating scars, improve the general appearance of
the skin and the signs of photo-aging, constituting interesting results for
adult females. The combination of techniques is the most effective option
for acne scars. A retrospective, non-blind, uncontrolled study evaluated in
114 patients the results of the combination, under tumescent anesthesia, in
a single session, of 20% TCA superficial peel, extensive sub-incision and
fractionated CO2 laser. There was improvement of 2.9 on a scale of 1 to 4
and few complications; 90% of the patients were satisfied.122 A recent systematic
review concluded that there is no evidence of high quality for the various
interventions proposed for the treatment of acne scars due to poor
methodology, lack of statistical power, lack of standardization of efficacy
data and variables evaluated before the interventions. There is moderate
evidence for fillers, but there is a lack of studies with prolonged
follow-up (the largest was 48 weeks) and comparative with placebo or false
intervention. This review was not able to establish any intervention as a
first line for the treatment of acne scars.123Maintenance treatment Maintenance therapy is needed to minimize the likelihood of relapse after
treatment, since acne recurrences are common. Factors such as efficacy,
tolerability and adherence should be taken into account when assessing the
duration of maintenance therapy. According to an European review, 15 or 20%
azelaic acid, 0.025% or 0.05% tretinoin and 0.1% adapalene are recommended
as maintenance therapy in AFA.7QUALITY OF LIFEThe term quality of life (QoL) can be characterized, in a subjective way, as the
patient’s perception about their illness and treatment, whereas in the technical
concept it covers a series of components related to mental health, physical,
functional and social dimensions. In dermatological diseases, studies suggest that
psychometric tools may help the physician better choose the therapeutic proposal and
detect patients psychologically affected, even with a clinical condition considered
to be mild. The development of indicators, instruments or questionnaires is based on
evidence that there is disagreement between the evaluation of the physician or
health professional and that of the patient regarding the severity of the disease
and treatment success, as well as different responses to the established therapy and
different levels of satisfaction between patients with the same clinical
condition.124Studies related to acne point to a negative influence on quality of life, including
the presence of signs and symptoms of depression and anxiety, such as anger and low
self-esteem.125-127 The use of disease-specific
questionnaires, such as Quality of Life in Acne (Acne-QoL), already translated and
validated for Brazilian Portuguese, quantifies the impact of acne on quality of
life.128-130The literature shows that the impact on quality of life does not always correlate
with the severity of acne. In some cases, females with mild clinical conditions have
a high impact on quality of life.126 Studies have also shown that the psychological impact of acne
appears to affect more females than males.131 In any case, the physician’s attention, good relationship
with the patient and adequate treatment, topical and/or systemic, although not
completely effective demonstrates a positive impact on quality of life.53CONCLUSIONAFA has been considered a particular subtype of acne, distinct from acne vulgaris or
adolescent acne, not only for differences in clinical status and etiopathogenesis,
but also for its chronicity, which may last until the postmenopausal period. Some
characteristics such as more sensitive and less oily skin, and multiple
etiopathogenic factors, such as new work rate in women’s lives, stress, sleep
disorders, dietary supplements and certain types of contraceptive methods make
management more complex. Recent findings on its chronicity, involving TLR
stimulation, demonstrate that control of the innate immune response has contributed
to understanding the mechanism of action of the drugs used in its treatment.For all these issues, AFA is a challenge in clinical practices and should be further
understood.Footnotes*Work conducted at the Department of Dermatology, Escola Paulista de Medicina,
Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo (SP), Brazil.Financial support: None.Conflict of interest: Dr. Samanta Nunes is a medical consultant at Bayer.Contributed by AUTHORS’CONTRIBUTIONSEdileia Bagatin0000-0001-7190-8241Approval of the final version of the manuscript; Conception and planning of the
study; Elaboration and writing of the manuscript; Obtaining, analyzing and
interpreting the data; Effective participation in research orientation;
Intellectual participation in propaedeutic and/or therapeutic conduct of the
cases studied; Critical review of the literature; Critical review of the
manuscriptThais Helena Proença de Freitas0000-0002-5594-3837Approval of the final version of the manuscript; Conception and planning of the
study; Elaboration and writing of the manuscript; Obtaining, analyzing and
interpreting the data; Effective participation in research orientation;
Intellectual participation in propaedeutic and/or therapeutic conduct of the
cases studied; Critical review of the literature; Critical review of the
manuscriptMaria Cecilia Rivitti Machado0000-0003-2910-7330Approval of the final version of the manuscript; Conception and planning of the
study; Elaboration and writing of the manuscript; Obtaining, analyzing and
interpreting the data; Effective participation in research orientation;
Intellectual participation in propaedeutic and/or therapeutic conduct of the
cases studied; Critical review of the literature; Critical review of the
manuscriptBeatriz Medeiros Ribeiro0000-0002-2171-9378Approval of the final version of the manuscript; Conception and planning of the
study, Elaboration and writing of the manuscript; Obtaining, analyzing and
interpreting the data; Effective participation in research orientation;
Intellectual participation in propaedeutic and/or therapeutic conduct of the
cases studied; Critical review of the literature; Critical review of the
manuscriptSamanta Nunes0000-0001-5846-3372Critical review of the literature; Critical review of the manuscriptMarco Alexandre Dias da Rocha0000-0003-1090-177XApproval of the final version of the manuscript; Conception and planning of the
study; Elaboration and writing of the manuscript; Obtaining, analyzing and
interpreting the data; Effective participation in research orientation;
Intellectual participation in propaedeutic and/or therapeutic conduct of the
cases studied; Critical review of the literature; Critical review of the
manuscriptREFERENCES1. Dréno B, Thiboutot D, Layton AM, Berson D, Perez M, Kang S, Global Alliance to Improve Outcomes in Acne  Large-scale international study enhances understanding of an
emerging acne population: adult females. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2015;29:1096–1106. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]2. Dréno B. Treatment of adult female acne: a new challenge. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2015;29(Suppl 5):14–19. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]3. Goulden V, Clark SM, Cunliffe WJ. Post-adolescent acne: a review of clinical
features. Br J Dermatol. 1997;136:66–70. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]4. Tanghetti EA, Kawata AK, Daniels SR, Yeomans K, Burk CT, Callender VD. Understanding the burden of adult female acne. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2014;7:22–30. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]5. Cunliffe WJ, Gould DJ. Prevalence of facial acne vulgaris in late adolescence and in
adults. Br Med J. 1979;1:1109–1110. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]6. Schmitt JV, Masuda PY, Miot HA. Acne in women: clinical patterns in different
age-groups. An Bras Dermatol. 2009;84:349–354. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]7. Dréno B, Layton A, Zouboulis CC, López-Estebaranz JL, Zalewska-Janowska A, Bagatin E, et al. Adult female acne: a new paradigm. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2013;27:1063–1070. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]8. Preneau S, Dreno B. Female acne a different subtype of teenager acne? J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2012;26:277–282. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]9. Zeichner JA, Baldwin HE, Cook-Bolden FE, Eichenfield LF, Fallon-Friedlander S, Rodriguez DA. Emerging Issues in Adult Female Acne. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2017;10:37–46. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]10. Silpa-Archa N, Kohli I, Chaowattanapanit S, Lim HW, Hamzavi I. Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation: A comprehensive overview:
Epidemiology, pathogenesis, clinical presentation, and noninvasive
assessment technique. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2017;77:591–605. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]11. Addor FA, Schalka S. Acne in adult women: epidemiological, diagnostic and therapeutic
aspects. An Bras Dermatol. 2010;85:789–795. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]12. Auffret N, Claudel JP, Leccia MT, Poli F, Farhi D, Dréno B. AFAST - Adult Female Acne Scoring Tool: an easy-to-use tool for
scoring acne in adult females. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2016;30:824–828. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]13. Dréno B, Poli F, Pawin H, Beylot C, Faure M, Chivot M, et al. Development and evaluation of a Global Acne Severity Scale (GEA
Scale) suitable for France and Europe. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2011;25:43–48. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]14. Bhat YJ, Latief I, Hassan I. Update on etiopathogenesis and treatment of Acne. Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol. 2017;83:298–306. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]15. Antiga E, Verdelli A, Bonciani D, Bonciolini V, Caproni M, Fabbri P. Acne: a new modelo f imune-mediated chronic inflammatory skin
disease. G Ital Dermatol Venereol. 2015;150:247–254. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]16. Rocha MA, Costa CS, Bagatin E. Acne vulgaris: an inflammatory disease even before the onset of
clinical lesions. Inflamm Allergy Drug Targets. 2014;13:162–167. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]17. Del Rosso JQ, Harper JC, Graber EM, Thiboutot D, Silverberg NB, Eichenfield LF. Status report from the American Acne & Rosacea Society on
medical management of acne in adult women, part 2: topical
therapies. Cutis. 2015;96:321–325. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]18. Rocha MA, Bagatin E. Skin barrier and microbiome in acne. Arch Dermatol Res. 2018;310:181–185. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]19. Goulden V, McGeown CH, Cunliffe WJ. The familial risk of adult acne: a comparison between
first-degree relatives of affected and unaffected
individuals. Br J Dermatol. 1999;141:297–300. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]20. Zouboulis CC, Picardo M, Ju Q, Kurokawa I, Törocsik D, Bíró T. Beyond acne: Current aspects of sebaceous gland biology and
function. Rev Endocr Metab Disord. 2016;17:319–334. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]21. Albuquerque RG, Rocha MA, Bagatin E, Tufik S, Andersen ML. Could adult female acne be associated with modern
life? Arch Dermatol Res. 2014;306:683–688. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]22. Das S, Reynolds RV. Recent advances in acne pathogenesis: implications for
therapy. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2014;15:479–488. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]23. Beylot C, Auffret N, Poli F, Claudel JP, Leccia MT, Del Giudice P, et al. Propionibacterium acnes: an update on its role in the
pathogenesis of acne. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2014;28:271–278. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]24. Ribeiro BM, Almeida LMC, Costa A, Francesconi F, Follador I, Neves JR. Etiopatogenia da acne vulgar: uma revisão prática
para o dia a dia do consultório de dermatologia. Surg Cosmet Dermatol. 2015;7(Suppl 1):S20–S26. [Google Scholar]25. Dreno B, Gollnick HP, Kang S, Thiboutot D, Bettoli V, Torres V. Understanding innate immunity and inflammation in acne:
implications for management. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2015;29(Suppl 4):3–11. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]26. Melnik BC, Zouboulis CC. Potential role of FoxO1 and mTORC1 in the pathogenesis of Western
diet-induced acne. Exp Dermatol. 2013;22:311–315. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]27. Pontes Tde C, Fernandes Filho GM, Trindade Ade S, Sobral Filho JF. Incidence of acne vulgaris in young adult users of
protein-calorie supplements in the city of João Pessoa -
PB. An Bras Dermatol. 2013;88:907–912. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]28. Kazandjieva J, Tsankov N. Drug-induced acne. Clin Dermatol. 2017;35:156–162. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]29. Dréno B. General antibiotic therapy in acne. Rev Prat. 2002;52:841–843. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]30. Kang D, Shi B, Erfe MC, Craft N, Li H. Vitamin B12 modulates the transcriptome of the skin microbiota in
acne pathogenesis. Sci Transl Med. 2015;7:293ra103–293ra103. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]31. Zeichner JA. Evaluating and treating the adult female patient with
acne. J Drugs Dermatol. 2013;12:1416–1427. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]32. Lortscher D, Admani S, Satur N, Eichenfield LF. Hormonal Contraceptives and Acne: A Retrospective Analysis of
2147 Patients. J Drugs Dermatol. 2016;15:670–674. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]33. Gezginc K, Balci O, Karatayli R, Colakoglu MC. Contraceptive efficacy and side effects of
Implanon. Eur J Contracept Reprod Health Care. 2007;12:362–365. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]34. Bahamondes L, Brache V, Meirik O, Ali M, Habib N, Landoulsi S, WHO Study Group on Contraceptive Implants for Women  A 3-year multicentre randomized controlled trial of
etonogestreland levonorgestrel-releasing contraceptive implants, with
non-randomized matched copper-intrauterine device controls. Hum Reprod. 2015;30:2527–2538. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]35. Poli F, Dreno B, Verschoore M. An Epidemiological study of acne in female adults: results of a
survey conducted in France. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2001;15:541–545. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]36. Yang YS, Lim HK, Hong KK, Shin MK, Lee JW, Lee SW, et al. Cigarette smoke-induced interleukin-1 alpha may be involved in
the pathogenesis of adult acne. Ann Dermatol. 2014;26:11–16. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]37. Yarak S, Bagatin E, Hassun KM, Parada MOAB, Talarico Filho S. Hyperandrogenism and skin: polycystic ovary syndrome and
peripheral insulin resistance. An Bras Dermatol. 2005;80:395–410. [Google Scholar]38. Rotterdam ESHRE/ASRM-Sponsored PCOS consensus workshop
group  Revised 2003 consensus on diagnostic criteria and long-term
health risks to polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) Hum Reprod. 2004;19:41–47. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]39. Marcondes JA, Barcellos CR, Rocha MP. Difficulties and pitfalls in the diagnosis of polycystic ovary
syndrome. Arq Bras Endocrinol Metabol. 2011;55:6–15. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]40. Sirmans SM, Pate KA. Epidemiology, diagnosis, and management of polycystic ovary
syndrome. Clin Epidemiol. 2013 Dec 18;6:1–13. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]41. Carmina E, Godwin AJ, Stanczyk FZ, Lippman JS, Lobo RA. The association of serum androsterone glucuronide with
inflammatory lesions in women with adult acne. J Endocrinol Invest. 2002;25:765–768. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]42. Cappel M, Mauger D, Thiboutot D. Correlation between serum levels of insulin-like growth factor 1,
dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate, and dihydrotestosterone and acne lesion
counts in adult women. Arch Dermatol. 2005;141:333–338. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]43. Azzouni F, Godoy A, Li Y, Mohler J. The 5 alpha-reductase isozyme family: a review of basic biology
and their role in human diseases. Adv Urol. 2012;2012:530121–530121. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]44. Labrie F, Luu-The V, Bélanger A, Lin SX, Simard J, Pelletier G. J Is dehydroepiandrosterone a hormone? J Endocrinol. 2005;187:169–196. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]45. Holzmann R, Shakery K. Postadolescent acne in females. Skin Pharmacol Physiol. 2014;27(Suppl 1):S3–S8. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]46. Gold LS, Baldwin H, Rueda MJ, Kerrouche N, DrÉno B. Adapalene-benzoyl Peroxide Gel is Efficacious and Safe in Adult
Female Acne, with a Profile Comparable to that Seen in Teen-aged
Females. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2016;9:23–29. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]47. Nast A, Dréno B, Bettoli V, Degitz K, Erdmann R, Finlay AY, et al. European evidence-based (S3) guidelines for the treatment of
acne. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2012;26(Suppl 1):S1–29. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]48. Berson D, Alexis A. Adapalene 0.3% for the Treatment of Acne in Women. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2013;6:32–35. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]49. Thielitz A, Lux A, Wiede A, Kropf S, Papakonstantinou E, Gollnick H. A randomized investigator-blind parallel-group study to assess
efficacy and safety of azelaic acid 15% gel vs. adapalene 0.1% gel in the
treatment and maintenance treatment of female adult acne. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2015;29:789–796. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]50. Berger R, Rizer R, Barba A, Wilson D, Stewart D, Grossman R, et al. Tretinoin gel microspheres 0.04% versus 0.1% in adolescents and
adults with mild to moderate acne vulgaris: a 12-week, multicenter,
randomized, double-blind, parallel-group, phase IV trial. Clin Ther. 2007;29:1086–1097. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]51. Kainz JT, Berghammer G, Auer-Grumbach P, Lackner V, Perl-Convalexius S, Popa R, et al. Azelaic acid 20 % cream: effects on quality of life and disease
severity in adult female acne patients. J Dtsch Dermatol Ges. 2016;14:1249–1259. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]52. Kircik LH. Efficacy and safety of azelaic acid (AzA) gel 15% in the
treatment of post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation and acne: a 16-week,
baseline-controlled study. J Drugs Dermatol. 2011;10:586–590. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]53. Rocha MAD, Guadanhim LRS, Sanudo A, Bagatin E. Modulation of Toll Like Receptor-2 on sebaceous gland by the
treatment of adult female acne. Dermatoendocrinol. 2017;9:e1361570.  [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]54. Alexis AF, Burgess C, Callender VD, Herzog JL, Roberts WE, Schweiger ES, et al. The Efficacy and Safety of Topical Dapsone Gel, 5% for the
Treatment of Acne Vulgaris in Adult Females With Skin of
Color. J Drugs Dermatol. 2016;15:197–204. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]55. Kircik LH. Use of Dapsone 5% Gel as Maintenance Treatment of Acne Vulgaris
Following Completion of Oral Doxycycline and Dapsone 5% Gel Combination
Treatment. J Drugs Dermatol. 2016;15:191–195. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]56. Dréno B, Bettoli V, Ochsendorf F, Layton AM, Perez M, Dakovic R. Efficacy and safety of clindamycin phosphate 1.2%/tretinoin
0.025% formulation for the treatment of acne vulgaris: pooled analysis of
data from three randomised, double-blind, parallel-group, phase III
studies. Eur J Dermatol. 2014;24:201–209. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]57. Kircik LH. Fixed Combination of Clindamycin Phosphate 1.2% and Benzoyl
Peroxide 3.75% Aqueous Gel: Long-Term Use in Adult Females With Moderate
Acne Vulgaris. J Drugs Dermatol. 2017;16:543–546. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]58. Bagatin E, Florez-White M, Arias-Gomez MI, Kaminsky A. Algorithm for acne treatment - Iberian-Latin American
Consensus. An Bras Dermatol. 2017;92:689–693. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]59. Sato K, Matsumoto D, Iizuka F, Aiba-Kojima E, Watanabe-Ono A, Suga H, et al. Anti-androgenic therapy using oral spironolactone for acne
vulgaris in Asians. Aesthetic Plast Surg. 2006;30:689–694. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]60. Plovanich M, Weng QY, Mostaghimi A. Low Usefulness of Potassium Monitoring Among Healthy Young Women
Taking Spironolactone for Acne. JAMA Dermatol. 2015;151:941–944. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]61. Lessner E, Fisher S, Kobraei K, Osleber M, Lessner R, Elliott L. Spironolactone and topical retinoids in adult female cyclical
acne. J Drugs Dermatol. 2014;13:126–129. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]62. Kim GK, Del Rosso JQ. Oral Spironolactone in Post-teenage Female Patients with Acne
Vulgaris: Practical Considerations for the Clinician Based on Current Data
and Clinical Experience. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2012;5:37–50. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]63. Krunic A, Ciurea A, Scheman A. Efficacy and tolerance of acne treatment using both
spironolactone and a combined contraceptive containing
drospirenone. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2008;58:60–62. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]64. Layton AM, Eady EA, Whitehouse H, Del Rosso JQ, Fedorowicz Z, van Zuuren EJ. Oral Spironolactone for Acne Vulgaris in Adult Females: A Hybrid
Systematic Review. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2017;18:169–191. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]65. de Bastos M, Stegeman BH, Rosendaal FR, Van Hylckama Vlieg A, Helmerhorst FM, Stijnen T, et al. Combined oral contraceptives: venous thrombosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014:CD010813.  [PubMed] [Google Scholar]66. Fox L, Csongradi C, Aucamp M, du Plessis J, Gerber M. Treatment Modalities for Acne. Molecules. 2016;21:E1063.  [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]67. Cooper AJ, Harris VR. Modern management of acne. Med J Aust. 2017;206:41–45. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]68. Dispenza MC, Wolpert EB, Gilliland KL, Dai JP, Cong Z, Nelson AM. Systemic isotretinoin therapy normalizes exaggerated
TLR-2-mediated innate immune responses in acne patients. J Invest Dermatol. 2012;132:2198–2205. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]69. Melnik BC. Isotretinoin and FoxO1: A scientific hypothesis. Dermatoendocrinol. 2011;3:141–165. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]70. Bagatin E. Oral isotretinoin: the most promising dermatological off-label
uses. Exp Rev Dermatol. 2010;5:617–626. [Google Scholar]71. Nickle SB, Peterson N, Peterson M. Updated physician's guide to the off-label uses of oral
isotretinoin. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2014;7:22–34. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]72. Sbidian E, Vicaut É, Chidiack H, Anselin E, Cribier B, Dréno B. A randomized-controlled trial of oral low-dose isotretinoin for
difficult-to-treat papulopustular rosacea. J Invest Dermatol. 2016;136:1124–1129. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]73. Bagatin E, Guadanhim LR, Enokihara MM, Sanudo A, Talarico S, Miot HA, et al. Low-dose oral isotretinoin versus topical retinoic acid for
photoaging: a randomized, comparative study. Int J Dermatol. 2014;53:114–122. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]74. de Souza Leão Kamamoto C, Sanudo A, Hassun KM, Bagatin E. Low-dose oral isotretinoin for moderate to severe
seborrhea/seborrheic dermatitis: a randomized and comparative
trial. Int J Dermatol. 2017;56:80–85. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]75. Rademaker M. Adverse effects of isotretinoin: A retrospective review of 1743
patients started on isotretinoin. Australas J Dermatol. 2010;51:248–253. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]76. Brzezinski P, Borowska K, Chiriac A, Smigielski J. Adverse effects of isotretinoin: A large, retrospective
review. Dermatol Ther. 2017;14:e12483  [PubMed] [Google Scholar]77. Rademaker M. Isotretinoin: dose, duration and relapse. What does 30 years of
usage tell us? Australas J Dermatol. 2013;54:157–162. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]78. Hansen TJ, Lucking S, Miller JJ, Kirby JS, Thiboutot DM, Zaenglein AL. Standardized laboratory monitoring with use of isotretinoin in
acne. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2016;75:323–328. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]79. Sladden MJ, Harman KE. What is the chance of a normal pregnancy in a woman whose fetus
has been exposed to isotretinoin. Arch Dermatol. 2007;143:1187–1188. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]80. Halvorsen JA, Stern RS, Dalgard F, Thoresen M, Bjertness E, Lien L. Suicidal ideation, mental health problems and social impairment
are increased in adolescents with acne: a population-based
study. J Invest Dermatol. 2011;131:363–370. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]81. Marron SE, Tomas-Araones L, Boira S. Anxiety, depression, quality of life and patient satisfaction in
acne patients treated with oral isotretinoin. Acta Derm Venereol. 2013;93:701–706. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]82. Huang YC, Cheng YC. Isotretinoin treatment for acne and risk of depression: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2017;76:1068.e9–1076.e9. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]83. Etminan M, Bird ST, Delaney JA, Bressler B, Brophy JM. Isotretinoin and risk for inflammatory bowel disease: a nested
case-control study and meta-analysis of published and unpublished
data. JAMA Dermatol. 2013;149:216–220. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]84. Alhusayen RO, Juurlink DN, Mamdani MM, Morrow RL, Shear NH, Dormuth CR, Canadian Drug Safety and Effectiveness Research Network  Isotretinoin use and the risk of inflammatory bowel disease: a
population-based cohort study. J Invest Dermatol. 2013;133:907–912. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]85. Margolis DJ, Fanelli M, Hoffstad O, Lewis JD. Potential association between the oral tetracycline class of
antimicrobials used to treat acne and inflammatory bowel
disease. Am J Gastroenterol. 2010;105:2610–2616. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]86. Lee YH, Scharnitz TP, Muscat J, Chen A, Gupta-Elera G, Kirby JS. Laboratory monitoring during isotretinoin therapy for acne: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Dermatol. 2016;152:35–44. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]87. Sampaio SAP, Bagatin E. A 65-year experience treating acne, including 26 years with oral
isotretinoin. An Bras Dermatol. 2008;834:361–367. [Google Scholar]88. Shinkai K, McMichael A, Linos E. Isotretinoin laboratory test monitoring-a call to decrease
testing in an era of high-value, cost-conscious care. JAMA Dermatol. 2016;152:17–19. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]89. Boyraz N, Mustak PK. Comparison of the efficacies of intermittent and continuous
low-dose isotretinoin regimens in the treatment of moderate acne
vulgaris. Int J Dermatol. 2013;52:1265–1267. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]90. Rademaker M, Wishart JM, Birchall NM. Isotretinoin 5 mg daily for low-grade adult acne vulgaris - a
placebo-controlled, randomized double-blind study. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2014;28:747–754. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]91. Dhaked DR, Meena RS, Maheshwari A, Agarwal US, Purohit S. A randomized comparative trial of two low-dose oral isotretinoin
regimens in moderate to severe acne vulgaris. Indian Dermatol Online J. 2016;7:378–385. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]92. Schmitt JV, Tavares M, Cerci FB. Adult women with acne have a higher risk of elevated triglyceride
levels with the use of oral isotretinoin. An Bras Dermatol. 2011;86:807–810. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]93. Cetinözman F, Aksoy DY, Elçin G, Yildiz BO. Insulin sensitivity, androgens and isotretinoin therapy in women
with severe acne. J Dermatolog Treat. 2014;25:119–122. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]94. Thielitz A, Sidou F, Gollnick H. Control of microcomedone formation through a maintenance
treatment with adapalene gel 0 1%. J Eur Acad Dermatol. Venereol. 2007;21:747–753. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]95. Morales-Cardona CA, Sánchez-Vanegas G. Tasa de recaída y factores pronóstico de
recaída después del tratamiento con isotretinoína oral
en pacientes con acné quístico. Acne Relapse Rate and
Predictors of Relapse Following Treatment with Oral
Isotretinoin. Actas Dermosifiliogr. 2013;104:61–66. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]96. Chularojanamontri L, Tuchinda P, Kulthanan K, Pongparit K. Moisturizers for acne-what are their constituents. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2014;7:36–44. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]97. Araviiskaia E, Dréno B. The role of topical dermocosmetics in acne
vulgaris. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2016;30:926–935. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]98. Larsen RL. Over-the-counter treatments for acne and rosacea. Semin Cutan Med Surg. 2016;35:87–95. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]99. Barros BS, Zaenglein AL. The Use of Cosmeceuticals in Acne: Help or Hoax? Am J Clin Dermatol. 2017;18:159–163. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]100. Wohlrab J, Kreft D. Niacinamide-mechanisms of action and its topical use in
dermatology. Skin Pharmacol Physiol. 2014;27:311–315. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]101. Kim SJ, Baek JH, Koh JS, Bae MI, Lee SJ, Shin MK. The effect of physically applied alpha hydroxy acids on the skin
pore and comedone. Int J Cosmet Sci. 2015;37:519–525. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]102. Draelos Z, Lewis J, McHugh L, Pellegrino A, Popescu L. Novel retinoid ester in combination with salicylic acid for the
treatment of acne. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2016;15:36–42. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]103. Dreno B, Castell A, Tsankov N, Lipozencic J, Serdaroglu S, Gutierrez V, et al. Interest of the association retinaldehyde/glycolic acid in adult
acne. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2009;23:529–532. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]104. Monfrecola G, Cacciapuoti S, Capasso C, Delfino M, Fabbrocini G. Tolerability and camouflaging effect of corrective makeup for
acne: results of a clinical study of a novel face compact
cream. Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol. 2016;9:307–313. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]105. Mahajan BB, Garg G. Therapeutic efficacy of intralesional triamcinolone acetonide
versus intralesional triamcinolone acetonide plus lincomycin in the
treatment of nodulocystic acne. Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol. 2003;69:217–219. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]106. Levy LL, Zeichner JA. Management of acne scarring, part II: a comparative review of
non-laser-based, minimally invasive approaches. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2012;13:331–340. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]107. El-Domyati M, Hosam W, Abdel-Azim E, Abdel-Wahab H, Mohamed E. Microdermabrasion: a clinical, histometric, and histopathologic
study. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2016;15:503–513. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]108. Marczyk B, Mucha P, Budzisz E, Rotsztejn H. Comparative study of the effect of 50% pyruvic and 30% salicylic
peels on the skin lipid film in patients with acne vulgaris. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2014;13:15–21. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]109. Puri N. Efficacy of modified Jessner's peel and 20% TCA versus 20% TCA
peel alone for the treatment of acne scars. J Cutan Aesthet Surg. 2015;8:42–45. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]110. Abdel Meguid AM, Elaziz Ahmed Attallah DA, Omar H. Trichloroacetic acid versus salicylic acid in the treatment of
acne vulgaris in dark-skinned patients. Dermatol Surg. 2015;41:1398–1404. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]111. Dayal S, Amrani A, Sahu P, Jain VK. Jessner's solution vs. 30% salicylic acid peels: a comparative
study of the efficacy and safety in mild-to-moderate acne
vulgaris. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2017;16:43–51. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]112. Alba MN, Gerenutti M, Yoshida VM, Grotto D. Clinical comparison of salicylic acid peel and LED-Laser
phototherapy for the treatment of acne vulgaris in teenagers. J Cosmet Laser Ther. 2017;19:49–53. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]113. Sakamoto FH, Lopes JD, Anderson RR. Photodynamic therapy for acne vulgaris: a critical review from
basis to clinical practice. Part I. Acne vulgaris: when and why consider
photodynamic therapy. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2010;63:183–193. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]114. Barbaric J, Abbott R, Posadzki P, Car M, Gunn LH, Layton AM, et al. Light therapies for acne: abridged Cochrane systematic review
including GRADE assessments. Br J Dermatol. 2018;178:61–75. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]115. Politi Y, Levi A, Enk CD, Lapidoth M. Integrated cooling-vacuum-assisted 1540-nm erbium: glass laser is
effective in treating mild-to-moderate acne vulgaris. Lasers Med Sci. 2015;30:2389–2393. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]116. Paithankar D.  Pivotal Study of Sebacia Microparticles in the Treatment of Acne
Vulgaris, Annual meeting of the American Society for Laser Medicine and
Surgery. 2014.  [2018 Feb 18].  Clinicaltrials.gov [Internet] Available from:  https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/{"type":"clinical-trial","attrs":{"text":"NCT02217228","term_id":"NCT02217228"}}NCT02217228. [Google Scholar]117. Lanoue J, Goldenberg G. Acne scarring: a review of cosmetic therapies. Cutis. 2015;95:276–281. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]118. Gadkari R, Nayak C. A split-face comparative study to evaluate efficacy of combined
subcision and dermaroller against combined subcision and cryoroller in
treatment of acne scars. J Cosmet Dermatol. 2014;13:38–43. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]119. You HJ, Kim DW, Yoon ES, Park SH. Comparison of four different lasers for acne scars: Resurfacing
and fractional lasers. J Plast Reconstr Aesthet Surg. 2016;69:e87–e95. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]120. Brauer JA, Kazlouskaya V, Alabdulrazzaq H, Bae YS, Bernstein LJ, Anolik R, et al. Use of a picosecond pulse duration laser with specialized optic
for treatment of facial acne scarring. JAMA Dermatol. 2015;151:278–284. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]121. Chandrashekar BS, Sriram R, Mysore R, Bhaskar S, Shetty A. Evaluation of microneedling fractional radiofrequency device for
treatment of acne scars. J Cutan Aesthet Surg. 2014;7:93–97. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]122. Taylor MB, Zaleski-Larsen L, McGraw TA. Single session treatment of rolling acne scars using tumescent
anesthesia, 20% trichloracetic acid extensive subcision, and fractional CO2
laser. Dermatol Surg. 2017;43(Suppl 1):S70–S74. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]123. Abdel Hay R, Shalaby K, Zaher H, Hafez V, Chi CC, Dimitri S, et al. Interventions for acne scars. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016;4:CD011946.  [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]124. Berlim MT, Fleck MP. "Quality of life": a brand new concept for research and practice
in psychiatry. Rev Bras Psiquiatr. 2003;25:249–252. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]125. Kellett SC, Gawkrodger DJ. The psychological and emotional impact of acne and the effect of
treatment with isotretinoin. Br J Dermatol. 1999;140:273–282. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]126. Rapp DA, Brenes GA, Feldman SR, Fleischer AB Jr, Graham GF, Dailey M, et al. Anger and acne: implications for quality of life, patient
satisfaction and clinical care. Br J Dermatol. 2004;151:183–189. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]127. Dalgard F, Gieler U, Holm JØ, Bjertness E, Hauser S. Self-esteem and body satisfaction among late adolescents with
acne: results from a population survey. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2008;59:746–751. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]128. Kamamoto CSL, Hassun KM, Bagatin E, Tomimori J. Acne-specific quality of life questionnaire (Acne-QoL):
translation, cultural adaptation and validation into Brazilian-Portuguese
language. An Bras Dermatol. 2014;89:83–90. [PMC free article] [PubMed] [Google Scholar]129. Patrick DL, Deyo RA. Generic and disease-specific measures in assessing health status
and quality of life. Med Care. 1989;27(Supp l):S217–S232. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]130. Klassen AF, Newton JN, Mallon E. Measuring quality of life in people referred for specialist care:
of acne comparing generic and disease-specific measures. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2000;43:229–233. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]131. Dumont-Wallon G, Dréno B. Specificity of acne in women older than 25 years. Presse Med. 2008;37:585–591. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]Articles from Anais Brasileiros de Dermatologia are provided here courtesy of Sociedade Brasileira de Dermatologia





Other Formats

PubReader
PDF (596K)



Actions



Cite





Collections



Add to Collections







Create a new collection



Add to an existing collection






        Name your collection:
      


        Name must be less than  characters
      



        Choose a collection:
      



        Unable to load your collection due to an error
Please try again





      Add
    

      Cancel
    










Share

 
 




 




                                Permalink
                              


Copy








RESOURCES




                        Similar articles
                    







                        Cited by other articles
                    







                        Links to NCBI Databases
                    










[x]
Cite




      Copy
    

Download .nbib
.nbib


Format:


        AMA
      

        APA
      

        MLA
      

        NLM
      









Follow NCBI






Twitter




Facebook




LinkedIn







GitHub

























Connect with NLM



SM-Twitter












SM-Facebook









SM-Youtube









National Library of Medicine
8600 Rockville Pike
                  Bethesda, MD 20894


Web Policies
FOIA
HHS Vulnerability Disclosure


Help
Accessibility
Careers







NLM


NIH


HHS


USA.gov

































