Document Name: role of Lipo GMS-450 in Protective Cream3
Document link: https://www.atamanchemicals.com/glyceryl-monostearate_u23918/



















GLYCERYL MONOSTEARATE - Ataman Kimya















+90 216 577 10 10
info@atamanchemicals.com


KVKK Politikası
Information Society Services
Human Resources











PRODUCTS











Categories

Detergents, Cosmetics, Disinfectants, Pharmaceutical Chemicals
Water Treatment, Metal and Mining Chemicals
Paint, Construction, Plastics, Rubber Chemicals
Textile, Leather, Paper and Industrial Chemicals
Crop Protection, Food, Feed and Flavor Chemicals
Other Industries







NEWS


CORPORATE


CONTACT

















Quick Search



















PRODUCTS





PRODUCTS
Detergents, Cosmetics, Disinfectants, Pharmaceutical Chemicals
GLYCERYL MONOSTEARATE
Return to Product List




1-9
A-D
E-G
H-M
N-P
Q-S
T-Z



GLYCERYL MONOSTEARATE



Glycerol monostearate, commonly known as GMS, is a monoglyceride commonly used as an emulsifier in foods.

Glyceryl monostearate CAS number: 31566-31-1
Glyceryl monostearate EC number: 204-664-4
Glyceryl monostearate IUPAC name: 2,3-dihydroxypropyl octadecanoate
Synonyms:
Glyceryl monostearate; Monostearin; Glyceryl stearate; 1-Glyceryl stearate; GLİSERİL MONO STEARAT; GLİSERİL MONOSTEARAT; GLISERIL MONOSTEARAT; GLISERIL MONO STEARATE; GİLİSERİL MONO STEARATE; GLİSERİL MONO STEARATE; GILISERIN MONO SİTERAT; GILISERIN MONOSTERAT; GLISERIN MONOSITRAT; GLİSERİN MONO STEARAT; GLİSERİN MONOSTEARAT; GLİSERİNMONOSTEARAT; GLİSERİN MONOSTEARAD; GLISERIN MONOSTERAD;glıserıl mono stearat; gliseril mono stearat; gliseril monostearat; glıserıl monostearat; glıserıl mono stearate; giliseril mono stearate; gliseril mono stearate; gılıserın mono siterat; gılıserın monosterat; glıserın monosıtrat; gliserin mono stearat; gliserin monostearat; gliserinmonostearat;gliserin monostearad; glıserın monosterad;GLYCERYL MONOSTEARATE PRICES; GLYCERYL MONOSTEARATE SUPPLIERS;GLYCERYL MONOSTEARATE USES;GLYCERYL MONOSTEARATE MANUFACTURING;glyceryl monostearate prıces; glyceryl monostearate supplıers;glyceryl monostearate uses; glyceryl monostearate manufacturıng.; Monostéarate de glycéryle; GLYCERYL MONOSTEARATE ; GLYCEROL MONOOCTADECANOATE; Glyceryl Monostearate; GLYCERYL MONOSTEARATE; Monostéarate de glycéryle; OCTADECANOIC ACID, MONOESTER WITH 1,2,3-PROPANETRIOL; STEARATE DE DIHYDROXY-2,3 PROPYLE; STEARIC ACID,; MONOESTER WITH GLYCEROL; STEARIC MONOGLYCERIDE; gliseril monosterat; Gliseril monosterat; Gliseril Monosterat; GLİSERİL MONOSTERAT; gliseril monosterate; Gliseril monosterate; Gliseril Monosterate; GLİSERİL MONOSTERATE; Glyceryl Monostearate; glyceryl monostearate; gliseril monostearat; Gliseril monostearat; Gliseril Monostearat; GLİSERİL MONOSTEARAT; 1-Stearoyl-rac-glycerol; Stearin, 1-mono-; Octadecanoic acid, 2,3-dihydroxypropyl ester; 1-Monostearoylglycerol; Sandin EU;1-MONOSTEARIN; Glycerin 1-monostearate; Aldo MSD; Aldo MSLG; Glycerin 1-stearate; Glycerol 1-stearate;Arlacel 165;Tegin 55G;alpha-Monostearin;Emerest 2407;Aldo 33;Aldo 75;Glycerol 1-monostearate; Glyceryl 1-monostearate; Stearic acid 1-monoglyceride; 3-Stearoyloxy-1,2-propanediol; Glycerol alpha-monostearate; 2,3-dihydroxypropyl octadecanoate; alpha.-Monostearin; Tegin 515; 1-octadecanoyl-rac-glycerol; NSC 3875; 2,3-Dihydroxypropyl stearate; FEMA No. 2527; Stearic acid alpha-monoglyceride; NSC3875; Glyceryl Monostearate, pure; MONOSTEARIN (L); EINECS 204-664-4; EINECS 245-121-1; Stearic acid, monoester with glycerol;Glycerol .alpha.-monostearate; Stearic acid .alpha.-monoglyceride; (1)-2,3-Dihydroxypropyl stearate; glyceryl monostearate;monostearin;3-Stearoyloxy-1,2-propanediol; Glyceryl stearate; Alpha-Monostearin; Monostearin; Octadecanoic acid, 2,3-dihydroxypropyl ester; Glycerin 1;monostearate; Glycerin 1-stearate; Glycerol alpha-monostearate; Glyceryl 1-monostearate; Stearic acid alpha-monoglyceride; Stearic acid 1-monoglyceride; 1-Glyceryl stearate; 1-Monostearin; 1-Monostearoylglycerol; 1,2,3-Propanetriol 1-octadecanoyl ester;1-glycerol stearate;Glyceryl Monostearate;GMS;Glyceryl monostearate;1-Glyceryl stearate;1-Monostearin;1-Monostearoylglycerol;3-Stearoyloxy-1,2-propanediol;Aldo 33;Aldo 75;Aldo MSD;Aldo MSLG;Arlacel 165;Emerest 2407;FEMA No. 2527;Glycerin 1-monostearate;Glycerin 1-stearate;Glycerol 1-monostearate;Glycerol 1-stearate;Glycerol alpha-monostearate;Glyceryl 1-monostearate;NSC 3875;Sandin EU;Stearic acid 1-monoglyceride;Stearic acid alpha-monoglyceride;Tegin 55G;alpha-Monostearin;(1)-2,3-Dihydroxypropyl stearate;Glycerol stearate, pure;Octadecanoic acid, 2,3-dihydroxypropyl ester;Stearin, 1-mono-;Stearin, 1-mono-;Glycerin;Glycerin;Adipic acid;Pentaerythritol;Sodium hydroxide;Stearic acid;1,3-Dihydroxy-2-propanyl stearate [ACD/IUPAC Name];1,3-Dihydroxy-2-propanylstearat [German] [ACD/IUPAC Name];1,3-dihydroxypropan-2-yl octadecanoate;1,3-Dihydroxypropan-2-yl stearate;1-Glyceryl stearate;250-705-4 [EINECS];2-hydroxy-1-(hydroxymethyl)ethyl octadecanoate;2-hydroxy-1-(hydroxymethyl)ethyl stearate;2-stearoylglycerol;Glycerin monostearate;Glyceryl Monostearate;GLYCEROL STEARATE;Octadecanoic acid, 2-hydroxy-1-(hydroxymethyl)ethyl ester [ACD/Index Name]; Octadecanoic acid, monoester with 1,2,3-propanetriol;Stéarate de 1,3-dihydroxy-2-propanyle [French] [ACD/IUPAC Name]; [2-hydroxy-1-(hydroxymethyl)ethyl] octadecanoate; 1,2,3-Propanetriol 2-octadecanoyl ester; 1-Monoacylglyceride; 1-Monoacylglycerol; 2-Monostearin;2-Monostearoylglycerol; 2-octadecanoylglycerol; 2-octadecanoyloxy-propane-1,3-diol; 2-Octadecanoyl-rac-glycerol; 2-octadecanoyl-sn-glycerol; 2-Stearoyl-glycerol; 2-stearoyloxy-propane-1,3-diol; 2-Stearoyl-rac-glycerol; 31566-31-1 [RN]; 593-29-3 [RN];621-61-4 [RN]; b-Monoacylglycerol; glycerine monostearate; Glycerol β-sterate;Glycerol-β-monostearate; GLYCERYL 2-STEARATE; glyceryl monostearate; GLYCERYL STEARATE SE; Monostearin;octadecanoic acid [2-hydroxy-1-(hydroxymethyl)ethyl] ester; Octadecanoic acid 2-hydroxy-1-(hydroxymethyl)ethyl ester;Octadecanoic acid, potassium salt; β-Monostearin;TERMIUM Plus;1-O-octadecanoylglycerol ;2,3-dihydroxypropyl octadecanoate ;glycerin 1-monostearate ;glycerin 1-stearate ;glycerol 1-monostearate ;glycerol alpha-monostearate ;glycerol 1-stearate ;glyceryl stearate ;1-glyceryl stearate ;glyceryl 1-monostearate ;1-monostearin ;1-monostearoylglycerol ;octadecanoic acid 2,3-dihydroxypropyl ester;octadecanoic acid monoester with 1,2,3-propanetriol ;stearic acid 1-monoglyceride ;stearic acid alpha-monoglyceride ;3-stearoyloxy-1,2-propanediol ;glycerol a-monostearate;a-monostearin;stearic acid a-monoglyceride;1-Glyceryl stearate;1-Glyceryl stearic acid;1-Mono-Stearin;1-Monostearin;1-Monostearoylglycerol;2,3-Dihydroxypropyl stearate (ACD/Name 4.0);2,3-Dihydroxypropyl stearic acid (ACD/Name 4.0);3-Stearoyloxy-1,2-propanediol;Aldo 33;Aldo 75;Aldo MSD;Aldo MSLG;Arlacel 165;Emerest 2407;Glycerin 1-monostearate;Glycerin 1-monostearic acid; Glycerin 1-stearate;Glycerin 1-stearic acid;Glycerol αGlycerol 1-monostearic acid;Glycerol 1-stearate;Glycerol 1-stearic acid;Glyceryl 1-monostearate;Glyceryl 1-monostearic acid;MONOSTEARIN (L);Octadecanoate, 2,3-dihydroxypropyl ester;Octadecanoic acid, 2,3-dihydroxypropyl ester;Sandin EU;Stearate αStearate 1-monoglyceride;Stearic acid αStearic acid 1-monoglyceride;Tegin;Tegin 515;Tegin 55G;1-acyl-sn-glycerol;Fatty acid ester;Fatty acyl;1,2-diol;Carboxylic acid ester;Secondary alcohol;Carboxylic acid derivative;Monocarboxylic acid or derivatives;Primary alcohol;Hydrocarbon derivative;Organic oxygen compound;Carbonyl group;Alcohol;Organic oxide;Organooxygen compound;Aliphatic acyclic compound;Fatty acid esters ;Secondary alcohols ; Carboxylic acid esters ; 1,2-diols ;Monocarboxylic acids and derivatives ;Primary alcohols ;Organic oxides ;Hydrocarbon derivatives ;Carbonyl compounds ;aldo MSD KFG;glycerol stearate SE;hallstar GMS SE;lipo GMS 470 pastilles;lonzest GMR;lonzest GMS-D;nikkol MGS-150V;nikkol MGS-AMV;nikkol MGS-ASEV;nikkol MGS-AV;nikkol MGS-BMV;nikkol MGS-BSEV;nikkol MGS-BV2;nikkol MGS-DEXV;nikkolMGS-F40V;nikkol MGS-F50SEV;nikkol MGS-F50V;nikkol MGS-F75V;norfox gms-fg;octadecanoic acid ester with1,2,3-propane triol;octadecanoic acid; propane-1,2,3-triol;stearine;OCTADECANOIN;2-MONOSTEARIN;; 1,2,3-Propanetriol; 2-octadecanoyl ester;2-Hydroxy-1-(hydroxymethyl)ethyl stearate; 2-Monostearoylglycerol; beta-Glyceryl monostearate; beta-MonostearinGlycerol; beta-sterateGlycerol; -beta-monostearateStearic acid ;beta-monoglycerideStearin, 2-mono-2-stearoylglycerolGlyceryl 2-monostearate2-O-Stearoylglycerol2-O-Stearoyl-L-glycerolGlycerol 2-stearateOctadecanoic acid 2-hydroxy-1-(hydroxymethyl)ethyl esterStearic acid; 2-hydroxy-1-(hydroxymethyl)ethyl ester; 1,3-dihydroxypropan-2-yl; octadecanoatestearic acid ;(2-hydroxy-1-methylol-ethyl) ester2-Stearoyl-rac-glycerol;Fatty Acid Derivatives & LipidsGlycerols;2-Octadecanoylglycerol; Glycerin 1-monostearate; Glycerin 1-stearate, Glycerin monostearate, Glycerol 1-monostearate, Glycerol 1-stearate, Glycerol .alpha.-monostearate, Glycerol alpha-monostearate, Glyceryl Monostearate, Glycerol stearate, pure, Glyceryl 1-monostearate, Glyceryl-1-monostearate, Glyceryl monooctadecanoate, Glyceryl monostearate, Glyceryl monostearate [JAN], Glyceryl monostearate (JP15/NF), Glyceryl stearate, Grocor 5500, Grocor 6000, Hodag GMS, Imwitor 191, Imwitor 900K, Kessco 40, Lipo GMS 410, Lipo GMS 450, Lipo GMS 600, LMGL01010003, LS-164168, M2015_SIGMA, MG(18:0/0:0/0:0)[rac], Monelgin, Monoglyceryl stearate, Monostearate (glyceride), Monostearin, MONOSTEARIN (L), Myvaplex 600, NCGC00164529-01, NSC3875, NSC 3875, Octadecanoic acid, 2,3-dihydroxypropyl ester, Octadecanoic acid, ester with 1,2,3-propanetriol, Octadecanoic acid, monoester with 1,2,3-propanetriol, Ogeen 515, Ogeen GRB, Ogeen M, Ogeen MAV, Orbon, Protachem GMS, (R)-2,3-Dihydroxypropyl stearate, rac-Glycerol 1-stearate, S-7950, Sandin EU, Sedetine, Starfol GMS 450, Starfol GMS 600, Starfol GMS 900, Stearates, Stearic acid 1-monoglyceride, Stearic acid .alpha.-monoglyceride, Stearic acid alpha-monoglyceride, stearic acid glyceryl ester, Stearic acid, monoester with glycerol, Stearic monoglyceride, Stearin, 1-mono-, Stearin, 1-mono- (8CI), Stearoylglycerol, Tegin, Tegin 503, Tegin 515, Tegin 55G, Unimate GMS, USAF KE-7, Witconol MS, Witconol MST; Octadecanoic Acid 2,3-Dihydroxypropyl Ester-d5; 1-Monostearin-d5; (+/-)-2,3-Dihydroxypropyl Octadecanoate-d5; 1-Glyceryl Stearate-d5; 1-Monooctadecanoylglycerol-d5; Aldo 33-d5; Aldo 75-d5; Aldo MSD-d5; NSC 3875-d5; Sandin EU-d5; Stearic Acid α-Monoglyceride-d5; Stearic Acid 1-Monoglyceride-d5; Tegin 55G-d5; α-Monostearin-d5;GLYCERYL STEARATE, 2,3-DIHYDROXYPROPYL ESTER OCTADECANOIC ACID; 2,3-DIHYDROXYPROPYL OCTADECANOATE; GLYCERIN 1-STEARATE; GLYCERIN STEARATE; GLYCEROL ISOSTEARATE; GLYCERY STEARATE; GLYCERYL ISOSTEARATE; GLYCERYL MONOISOSTEARATE; GYCEROL 1-STEARATE; ISOOCTADECANOIC ACID, ESTER WITH 1,2,3-PROPANETRIOL; ISOSTEARIC ACID MONOGLYCERIDE;Stearic Monoglyceride;octadecanoic acid 2,3-dihydroxypropyl ester;Monostearin;1,2,3-Propanetriol 1-octadecanoyl ester;1-Glyceryl stearate;1-Monostearin;1-Monostearoylglycerol;2,3-Dihydroxypropyl stearate;3-Stearoyloxy-1,2-propanediol;Aldo 33;Aldo 75;Aldo MSD;Aldo MSLG;Arlacel 165;Emerest 2407;Glycerin 1-monostearate;Glycerin 1-stearate;Glycerol 1-monostearate;Glycerol 1-stearate;Glycerol «alpha»-monostearate;Glycerol «alpha»-sterate;Glyceryl 1-monostearate;Glyceryl 1-octadecanoate;Monostearin (l);NSC 3875;Sandin EU;Stearic acid 1-monoglyceride;Stearic acid «alpha»-monoglyceride;Stearin, 1-mono-;Tegin55G;«alpha»-Monostearin;Cutina® GMS-SE; FINESTER 2860;abracols.l.g.;admul;advawax140;aldo-28;aldo-72;aldohms;aldoms;arlacel161;
PEG-200; GLYCERYL STEARATE; GLYCERYL STEARATE; DIMER DILINOLEATE; COPOLYMER GELOT 64 PELLETS; (GLYCERYL STEARATE PEG-75;) CAPMUL EMG; PEG-20 GLYCERYL STEARATE; PEG-20-PPG-10 GLYCERYL STEARATE; 1,3-PALMITIN-2-STEARIN; 1-PALMITIN-2-STEARIN; 1,3-OLEIN-2-STEARIN; PEG-5 GLYCERYL STEARATE; STEARATE; TriGlyceryl Monostearate; 1,2-DISTEAROYL-RAC-GLYCEROL; GLYCERYL MONORICINOLEATE; MONOOLEIN; Glycerol tristearate; Glyceryl monostearate; GLYCERYL MONOSTEARATE; ETHYLENE GLYCOL MONOSTEARATE,GLYCERYL STEARATE,GLYCERYL STEARATE SE; PROPYLENE GLYCOL; MONOSTEARATE (CONTAINS CA. 35% MONOPALMITATE);GMS;admul;orbon;tegin;aldoms;ogeenm;D01947;aldohms;aldo-72;aldo-28;Glycerin Monostearate; Monostearin; Octadecanoate acid, monoester with 1,2,3- propanetriol;2,3-dihydroxypropyl stearate; 2,3-dihydroxypropyl octadecanoate; Arlacel; Glyceryl Monostearate; Monostearin; octadecanoic acid, 2,3-dihydroxypropyl ester; Octadecanoic acid 2,3-dihydroxy-propyl ester; GLISERIL MONO STEARAT; GLİSERİL MONO STEARAT; GLİSERİL MONOSTEARAT; GLISERIL MONOSTEARAT; GLISERIL MONO STEARATE; GİLİSERİL MONO STEARATE; GLİSERİL MONO STEARATE; GILISERIN MONO SİTERAT; GILISERIN MONOSTERAT; GLISERIN MONOSITRAT; GLİSERİN MONO STEARAT; GLİSERİN MONOSTEARAT; GLİSERİNMONOSTEARAT; GLİSERİN MONOSTEARAD; GLISERIN MONOSTERAD;glıserıl mono stearat; gliseril mono stearat; gliseril monostearat; glıserıl monostearat; glıserıl mono stearate; giliseril mono stearate; gliseril mono stearate; gılıserın mono siterat; gılıserın monosterat; glıserın monosıtrat; gliserin mono stearat; gliserin monostearat; gliserinmonostearat;gliserin monostearad; glıserın monosterad;GLYCERYL MONOSTEARATE PRICES; GLYCERYL MONOSTEARATE SUPPLIERS;GLYCERYL MONOSTEARATE USES;GLYCERYL MONOSTEARATE MANUFACTURING;glyceryl monostearate prıces; glyceryl monostearate supplıers;glyceryl monostearate uses;glyceryl monostearate manufacturıng.; Monostéarate de glycéryle; GLYCERYL MONOSTEARATE ; GLYCEROL MONOOCTADECANOATE; Glyceryl Monostearate; GLYCERYL MONOSTEARATE; Monostéarate de glycéryle; OCTADECANOIC ACID, MONOESTER WITH 1,2,3-PROPANETRIOL; STEARATE DE DIHYDROXY-2,3 PROPYLE; STEARIC ACID,; MONOESTER WITH GLYCEROL; STEARIC MONOGLYCERIDE; gliseril monosterat; Gliseril monosterat; Gliseril Monosterat; GLİSERİL MONOSTERAT; gliseril monosterate; Gliseril monosterate; Gliseril Monosterate; GLİSERİL MONOSTERATE; Glyceryl Monostearate; glyceryl monostearate; gliseril monostearat; Gliseril monostearat; Gliseril Monostearat; GLİSERİL MONOSTEARAT
Glyceryl Monostearate Physical and Chemical Properties
Glyceryl Monostearate Appearance: White, Odorless
Glyceryl Monostearate Chemical Name: 2,3-Dihydroxypropyl Octadecanoate
Glyceryl Monostearate Chemical Formula: C28H20O2
Glyceryl Monostearate Molecular Weight: 388.4572
Glyceryl Monostearate Appearance White Powder / Wafers
Glyceryl Monostearate Physical State: Solid
Glyceryl Monostearate Storage: Store at room temperature
Glyceryl Monostearate Acid Value 3.0 Max.
Glyceryl Monostearate Saponification value 155 - 170
Glyceryl Monostearate Iodine value 3.0 Max.
Glyceryl Monostearate Melting Point: 78 ° C
Glyceryl Monostearate Boiling Point: ~ 476.9 ° C (at 760 mmHg) (Estimates)
Glyceryl Monostearate Freezing point: ° C 55 - 60
Glyceryl Monostearate Density: 1.0 g / cm3 (Predicted)
Glyceryl Monostearate It is of vegetable origin.
Glyceryl Monostearate is soluble in both oil and water.
Glyceryl Monostearate can be absorbed strongly at the Water / Oil interface and easily form a liquid crystalline phase with water.
What is Glyceryl Monostearate?
Glycerol monostearate, commonly known as GMS, is a monoglyceride commonly used as an emulsifier in foods. It takes the form of a hygroscopic, flaky powder with a white, odorless and sweet taste. Chemically it is the glycerol ester of stearic acid. Glycerol monostearate is available as three stereoisomers, enantiomeric 1-glycerol monostearate and 2-glycerol monostearate pair. Typically these come across as a mixture since many of their properties are similar. Glyceryl 1-stearate (Glycerol monostearate), commonly known as GMS, is an organic molecule used as an emulsifier. GMS is a hygroscopic, white, odorless and sweet-tasting flaky powder. It is the glycerol ester of stearic acid. It occurs naturally as a result of the breakdown of fats in the body by pancreatic lipase and is also found in fatty foods. GMS is a food additive used as a thickener, emulsifier, anti-caking and preservative agent; an emulsifying agent for oils, waxes and solvents; a protective coating for hygroscopic powders; solidifying and control release agent in pharmaceuticals; and a resin lubricant. It is also used in cosmetics and hair care products. In antiperspirant and deodorants, baby care, body care, face care, sun care, hair creams, face make-up, creams and lotions-skin care, sprayable emulsions, feet, hands and nails, self-tanning, nail care and color cosmetics. GMS is widely used in cooking preparations to add "body" to food. It is responsible for freezing and giving whipped cream its smooth texture. It is sometimes used as a staling agent in bread. Glycerol 1-stearate is approved by the FDA as GRAS. Glycerin raw material is obtained by reacting with triglycerides produced from animal and plant origin. As a result of this reaction, a mixture of mono and diglyceride is produced. Since the raw materials used in the production of Glyceryl Monostearate are not pure, a different ester mixture chemical substances such as oleate and palmitate are produced as a result of the reaction.
Commercial material used in foods is industrially produced by the glycerolysis reaction between triglycerides (from vegetable or animal fats) and glycerol. Glycerol monostearate occurs naturally in the body as a product of the breakdown of fats by pancreatic lipase. It is found in very low levels in some seed oils. GMS is a food additive used as a thickener, emulsifier, anti-solidification and preservative agent; an emulsifying agent for oils, waxes and solvents; a protective coating for hygroscopic powders; solidifying and control release agent in pharmaceuticals; and a resin lubricant. It is also used in cosmetics and hair care products. GMS is widely used in cooking preparations to add "body" to food. It is somewhat responsible for giving ice cream and whipped cream its smooth texture. It is sometimes used as an antistaling agent in bread. Glyceryl Monostearate, commonly known as Glyceryl Monostearate, is an organic molecule used as an emulsifier. Glyceryl Monostearate is a hygroscopic, white, odorless and sweet-tasting flaky powder. It is the glycerol ester of stearic acid. Fat breakdown of pancreatic lipase occurs naturally in the body and is found in fatty foods. Glyceryl Monostearate is a food additive used as a thickener, emulsifier, anti-cake maker and preservative; an emulsifying agent for oils, waxes and solvents; a protective coating for hygroscopic powders; a thickener and control release agent in pharmaceuticals; and a resin lubricant. It is also used in cosmetics and hair care products. Glyceryl Monostearate is widely used in cooking preparations to add "body" to food. It is responsible for giving ice cream and whipped cream to their soft tissues. It is sometimes used as an anti-snake ingredient in breads.
Glyceryln Monostearate, GMS (40%, 60%, 90%) is an emulsifier that facilitates the fusion of fat molecules with water. This will help prevent oil bloom on confectionery and truffles. Glyceryl Monostearate, Glycerine Monostearate can be applied to almost any product with water content and is especially recommended for use in water-oil mixtures. Glyceryl Monostearate, Glyceryl Monostearate (40%, 60%, 90%) prevents ice creams from drying out or too sweet. Glyceryl acts as a moisturizer, solvent and flavoring and can extend the preservation time. Glyceryl Monostearate, Glyceryl Monostearate (40%, 60%, 90%) is also applied as a filler in commercially prepared low-fat foods (Sucha as cake, cookie and sugar) and can also be used as a thickening agent in liquors. Glyceryl Monostearate, Glyceryl Monostearate also serves as a way with water to preserve some kinds of leaves. What's more, it is also widely applied as a sugar substitute. Although Glyceryl Monostearate has almost the same nutritional energy as Glyceryl Monostearate (40%, 60%, 90%) table sugar, it does not raise blood sugar levels and feeds bacteria that cause plaque-forming tooth cavity.
Glyceryl Monostearate Usage Areas
It is used as both an emulsifier and a stabilizer in the food industry. It is available in powder or bead forms in the market. It is a food additive with a distinctive odor, white or sometimes beige in color and known in the food industry with food code e 471.
It is a highly effective emulsifier in emulsifying the oil - water phase. It is also effective in extending the stratification and shelf life of food products. It is especially used in the bread and bakery products and pastry industry, in the oil industry.
Apart from the food industry, it finds use in the cosmetics, detergent, plastic and pharmaceutical industries.
Glyceryl Monostearate added to formulations of ice cream, starchy products, dairy products, chewing gum, chocolate and other food products; It is used as a softener in textile products and as a lubricant in plastic products.
Glyceryl Monostearate, used as an emulsifier in ice cream, prevents the development of coarse ice crystals and gives a smooth texture. Providing the formation of stable emulsions that do not break down during freezing, Glyceryl Monostearate improves shelf life by keeping the ice cream tight and dry without hardening. Glyceryl Monostearate, which facilitates the control of the aeration process for optimum overrun, should be added to the mixture at 0.3-0.4% before homogenization and pasteurization.
Glyceryl Monostearate in bakery products such as bread and cake; It causes the formation of soft, moist, well-porous interior products, gives the products a white luster and volume, retains moisture, delays the spongy structure and stale, and increases the shelf life of the product. With the use of Glyceryl Monostearate, the amount of egg yolk used in the products decreases and thus reduces the cost.
In chocolate products, Glyceryl Monostearate provides a good oil dispersion even at high temperatures, reduces stickiness and separation during production and storage, improves texture and consistency, reduces the crystallization of sugar, reduces the loss of flowering and product-specific luster, prevents products such as caramel and nougat from penetrating, aroma It ensures that the materials are dispersed and stabilized in a better way and acts as a plasticizer in gums.
In margarine products, it reduces the tension in oil and water interfaces, which leads to stable emulsion formation. When used in conjunction with Soy lecithin the solubility of Glyceryl Monostearate is increased. Glyceryl Monostearate, which causes a better mouth feeling in the product and increases its spreadability properties, emulsifies the water in margarine and stabilizes the water in the oil.
Glyceryl Monostearate is partially soluble in both water and oil. It is absorbed strongly at the oil / water interface and can easily form a liquid crystalline phase with water. Similar to other emulsifiers, the polar part of the molecule is in the aqueous phase and the apolar part is in the oil phase at the Oil-Water interface. In this respect, Glyceryl Monostearate acts as an interface tension reducer and stabilizer of emulsions.
Glyceryl Monostearate, which controls activities such as emulsification, dispersion, foaming, non-foaming, fat aggregation, is the most common emulsifier used in the food industry, keeps bakery products fresh, improves flour quality and is used as an emulsifying agent in ready-to-eat foods.
Glyceryl Monostearate added to formulations of ice cream, starchy products, dairy products, chewing gum, chocolate and other food products; It is used as a softener in textile products and as a lubricant in plastic products.
Glyceryl Monostearate, used as an emulsifier in ice cream, prevents the development of coarse ice crystals and gives a smooth texture. Providing the formation of stable emulsions that do not break down during freezing, Glyceryl Monostearate improves the shelf life by keeping the ice cream tight and dry without hardening. Glyceryl Monostearate should be added to freezing at 0.3-0.4% before homogenization and pasteurization.
Glyceryl Monostearate in bakery products such as bread and cake; It causes the formation of soft, moist and well-porous product interior, gives the products white shine and volume, retains moisture, delays the spongy structure and stale and increases the shelf life of the product. With the use of Glyceryl Monostearate, the amount of egg yolk used in the products decreases and thus reduces the cost.
In chocolate products, Glyceryl Monostearate provides a good oil dispersion even at high temperature, reduces stickiness and separation during production and storage, reduces sugar crystallization, decreases the loss of flowering and product-specific luster, prevents tooth penetration of products such as caramel and nougat, aroma agents are better. It provides dispersing and stabilization, and acts as a plasticizer in gums.
In the production of halva, 40% of this product is sold in the market under the trade name supra.
In margarine products, it reduces the tension in oil and water interfaces, which leads to stable emulsion formation. When used in conjunction with Soy lecithin the solubility of Glyceryl Monostearate is increased. Glyceryl Monostearate, which causes a better mouth feeling in the product and increases its spreadability properties, emulsifies the water in margarine and stabilizes the water in the oil.
Used for emulsification in ice cream, Glyceryl Monostearate prevents the development of ice crystals and provides the formation of a smooth and slippery structure. Glyceryl Monostearate increases the stability of the emulsion and ensures the continuity of homogeneity after freezing. Before heat treatment, 0.3-0.4% Glyceryl Monostearate can be added to ice cream mixes.
Glyceryl Monostearate (Glyceryl Monostearate-90) used in bread and bakery products adds brightness, whiteness and volume to the products. In addition, Glyceryl Monostearate creates a soft, moist product internal structure, the staling of the moisture-trapping product is delayed and the shelf life is extended. 0.3-0.6% Glyceryl Monostearate is used in bread and bakery products.
Glyceryl Monostearate in bakery products such as bread and cake; It adds white shine and volume to soft products, retains moisture, delays staling and increases the shelf life of Glyceryl Monostearate products. Dissolve 100-150 gr Glyceryl Monostearate in hot water. If added to 1 bag of product, it delays stale in the dough.
Glyceryl Monostearate is used in starch products, dairy products, ice cream products, chewing gum and chocolate products.
Glyceryl Monostearate, the short form GMS, is an organic molecule used as an emulsifier. Glyceryl Monostearate is a white, odorless and sweet-sweet waxy flaky powder. And it is hygroscopic. Glyceryl Monostearate is the glycerol ester of stearic acid. It occurs naturally as a byproduct of fat loss in our body and is found in many fatty foods. Glyceryl Monostearate is insoluble in water, soluble in hot grease, paraffin, alcohol, chloroform, acetone and diethyl ether. Glyceryl Monostearate, a food additive, is a thickening, emulsifying, scented and preservative agent; Glyceryl Monostearate is widely used in cooking preparations to add "body" to food. It is responsible for giving ice cream and whipped cream its smooth texture. It is sometimes used as an anti-snake ingredient in breads.
In pharmaceutical product manufacturing, Glyceryl Monostearate is a thickener and control release agent; and a resin lubricant. It is also used in many hair care formulas in the cosmetic industry. In food production, Glyceryl Monostearate is one of the most widely used and consumed additives and emulsifiers in oil chemical and daily chemical. Also, typical nonionic surfactant with emulsifying, foaming, anti-oxidation and anti-freezing properties. For other uses: Glyceryl Monostearate is an emulsifying agent for oils, waxes and solvents; a protective coating for hygroscopic powders. A professional China Glyceryl Monostearate Flame pharmaceutical grade and industrial grade and cosmetic grade raw materials supplier and Manufacturer, FENGCHEN GROUP CO., LTD has been supplying and exporting Glyceryl Monostearate Flake pharmaceutical grade and industrial grade and cosmetic grade raw materials from China for almost 10 years.
Applications and Uses:
Glyceryl Monostearate is stearic acid glycerol ester, widely used in the food and beverage industry as thickener, emulsifier, scented and preservative agents.
Glyceryl Monostearate As an emulsifying agent, Glyceryl Monostearate can be used in a wide variety of industries such as food production, beverage, pharmaceutical, cosmetic and various other industries.
Food processing:
Glyceryl Monostearate Emulsifier and surfactant beverage is used to increase stability and emulsify instant food, ice cream, oil, candy and chocolate.
Plastic processing:
Glyceryl Monostearate PVC, PP, PE etc. Used in as plasticizer, lubricant, antistatic agent, anti-fog agent, anti-aging agent and foaming agent.
Glyceryl Monostearate Daily chemical, Medical and textile industry:
Glyceryl Monostearate As emulsifier in personal care, Flavors and fragrances, medicine ointment and frost.
Application in the plastic industry:
Glyceryl Monostearate, Glycerin Monostearate, polymers plastic, acts as anti lubricant, anti-static agent, non-toxic plasticizer, anti aging in the production of packaging films. Glyceryl Monostearate, GMS can also improve plasticity, flexibility and anti-static properties.
-It is also widely applied in the production of polypropylene caps to provide a slip / lubricating effect in addition to the anti-static effect.
- In agriculture plastic films, Glyceryl Monostearate, Glycerin Monostearate acts as an anti fogging agent.
- Glyceryl Monostearate, GMS is used as a processing aid in the expanded polyethylene production process to improve gas exchange.
Glycerin Monostearate Benefits and Advantages:
1. Glyceryl Monostearate, Glycerine Monostearate reduces friction during the extrusion process, which makes the cell size distribution smooth. Thus, it improves the gas exchange.
2. Glyceryl Monostearate, Glycerine Monostearate are compatible with cationic, anionic and nonionic surfactants. And it has exceptional electrolyte tolerance.
3. Glyceryl Monostearate, Glycerin Monostearate has effects such as emulsification, dispersion, foaming, defoaming and starch aging, which are very useful in many products.
Other applications:
-Cosmetic uses, Glyceryl Monostearate, Glycerine Monostearate, acts as co-emulsifier of emulsions to change viscosity and increase stability.
- Glycerin Monostearate, Glycerin Monostearate, ice cream, chewing gum, toffee, shortening, margarine, starch etc. It functions as an emulsifier in the production of foods.
- Being an anti-aging agent for starch.
- Can be p rotational coating for Glyceryl Monostearate, GMS, hygroscopic powders.
Glyceryl monostearate (GMS) is an organic molecule used as an emulsifier in food. Glycerol ester of stearic acid is a colorless, odorless, sweet-sweet exfoliating powder. Glyceryl monostearate occurs naturally in the body as a product formed by the breakdown of fats and is often found in fatty foods. Glycerol monostearate, commonly known as GMS, is a hygroscopic exfoliating powder with a white, odorless and sweet taste feeling. It is the glycerol ester of stearic acid. It contains both water and oil soluble groups in a molecule, making it a very effective emulsifier. GMS has high nutritional value, non-toxic and therefore well suited for use in food formulations. It belongs to the class of nonionic emulsifiers. Glyceryl Monostearate (GMS) is a member of the chemical class known as Monoacylglycerols. These are glycerides consisting of a fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule by an ester bond. It is an organic molecule used as an emulsifier. Glyceryl Monostearate is a hygroscopic, colorless, odorless and sweet-tasting flaky powder. Glyceryl Monostearate (GMS) is the glycerol ester of stearic acid. Glyceryl Monostearate is a food additive used as a thickener, emulsifier, anti-cake maker and preservative; an emulsifying agent for oils, waxes and solvents; a protective coating for hygroscopic powders; a thickener and control release agent in pharmaceuticals; and a resin lubricant. Glyceryl Monostearate (GMS) is also used in cosmetics and hair care products. Glyceryl Monostearate is widely used in cooking preparations to add "body" to food.
An emulsion is a mixture of two propellants (water and oil). It allows an undissolved substance to be dispersed throughout a liquid. The dispersed phase is distributed in the other continuous phase. Emulsions are unstable and therefore tend to revert to a balanced level of oil that spontaneously separates from the water. Physical energy such as agitation, mixing, homogenizers or spraying processes is required to hold the emulsion. Surfactants increase the kinetic stability of emulsions and make the emulsion noticeably stable over the long term. An emulsifier is a surfactant agent used to keep the emulsion stable and well dispersed. Emulsifiers are typically a molecule with a hydrophobic head and a hydrophilic tail. Emulsifiers can surround a hydrophobic molecule and the hydrophilic tail forms a protective layer so that the oil molecules cannot "clump" together. This process ensures that the phase is well dispersed. Some of the most important emulsifiers include salts or esters of high fatty acids, fatty alcohols, monoglyceride esters, gelatin, lecithins, polysaccharides and casein.
Glycerides (also known as acylglycerols) are esterified with glycerol with fatty acids. Glycerol with three hydroxyl functional groups is esterified with one, two or three fatty acids to form monoglycerides, diglycerides and triglycerides, respectively. A monocyceride is a compound composed of fatty acid chains covalently linked to a glycerol molecule by ester linkage. Diglyceride and triglyceride consist of two and three fatty acid chains, respectively. Examples of triglycerides are triacetin, trimyristine, and triolein. Monoglyceride is usually formed as an intermediate in triglyceride metabolism through the release of a fatty acid from lipase. Commercial source animal or vegetable oils and can also be produced synthetically. Mono and diglycerides are common food additives used as emulsifiers or stabilizers to mix oil-hating and some water-hating ingredients, but rather not blend well.
The starting materials used to produce commercial grade Glyceryl Monostearate (a normal byproduct of its digestion) can be derived from animal fats and vegetable oils, including soybean, palm kernel and corn oil. Glycerol Stearate is generally prepared commercially from glycerin and fatty acids derived from corn or hydrogenated soybean oil.
Glyceryl Monostearate is a natural oily compound that is often used as an emulsifier, emulsion stabilizer, emollient, moisturizer and viscosity builder in creams and lotions. It is also used in cosmetics as an opaque and thinning agent. Glyceryl Monostearate can be of plant origin (corn based), animal source or synthetic, and is biodegradable, practically considered non-toxic oral, and does not cause skin and minimal eye irritation. It is dispersible in water and also soluble in oil and alcohol, making it an ideal ingredient for cosmetics. Glyceryl Monostearate (GMS) is also used as an ingredient in food products as well as cosmetic products. In a clinical trial involving more than 1,200 eczema patients, glycerol monostearate was found to cause absolutely no adverse reactions in the common emulsifiers test (causing adverse reactions in a significant percentage of other emulsifiers tested). It is used to keep bread products fresh, improve flour quality, and as an emulsifier and blinding agent for ready-to-eat food. Glyceryl Monostearate is also used in ice cream formulations, starch products, dairy products, chewing gum, chocolate and other foods. It is also used as an external lubricant for softer textiles and plastics. Another form of this chemical commonly used in cosmetics is glycerol monohydroxystearate, a reddish-white wax with wax-like physical properties. Glyceryl Monostearate provides functional properties and enhanced properties such as improved emulsion stability, bodybuilding and thickening properties, and greater dispersibility of colorants and active ingredients. Semi-synthetic forms of Glyceryl Monostearate use stearic acid isolated from palm oil as the starting material, another waxy fatty acid commonly used for cosmetics and soap. The glycerol component of Glyceryl Monostearate can be from beef oil, petroleum or vegetable sources and is used as a solvent and moisturizer (maintains the desired moisture level).
Glyceryl Monostearate is the fatty acid ester seen in cosmetics and beauty products (hair and skin) for various uses such as thickening agent, emulsifier, anti-adhesion agent, dispersing agent, solvent, lubricating agent and perfume diluent (Source). ). A Glyceryl Ester; Glyceryl Monostearate is found naturally in the body and in fatty foods and is formed during the pouring of fat in oil and can be produced synthetically according to research.
Glycerol monostearate, commonly known as GMS, is an organic molecule used as an emulsifier. GMS is a hygroscopic, white, odorless and sweet-tasting flaky powder. Glyceryl Monostearate is a glycerol ester of stearic acid. It occurs naturally through the breakdown of fats in the body and is also found in fatty foods.
Glyceryl Monostearate is a food additive used as a thickener, emulsifier, anti-cake maker and preservative; an emulsifying agent for oils, waxes and solvents; a protective coating for hygroscopic powders; a thickener and control release agent in pharmaceuticals; and a resin lubricant. It is also used in cosmetics and hair care products.
Glycerin monostearates are widely used in pharmaceutical, cosmetic and food field. Emulsifiers, co-emulsifiers, dissolving agents, dispersion additives, plasticizers, lubricants, consistency regulators, embedding agents, binders, etc. They can function due to their surfactant properties like.
Glyceryl Monostearate is widely used in cooking preparations to add "body" to foods. It is responsible for giving ice cream and whipped cream its smooth texture. It is sometimes used as an anti-clogging agent in breads. It is widely used in baked cakes and other baked goods. Glycerin monostearates are used as emulsifiers in the production of high quality biscuits. Glycerin monostearates help in reducing the consumption of fat used in making egg yolks or biscuits.
NSE Grade Acts as an O / W emulsifier, opacifier, emollient and bodybuilder for various cosmetic formulations for skin care and hair care.
Glycerin is the primary base for monostearates, creams and lotions. (NSE Garde) Other glycerine monostearates used such as sun care, antiperspirants, facial color cosmetics, depilatories, eye care, facial cleansers, lip care, liquid soap, oral care, shaving products, shampoos, styling aids (NSE Grade) chew As a softening agent in chewing gum, GMS is used in confectionery to ensure the uniform distribution of aroma oils, improve texture and show quality.
 





Share !






 

















E-NEWSLETTER
















SHORTCUTS

PRODUCTS
NEWS
CORPORATE
HUMAN RESOURCES
BLOG
CATALOG REQUEST



CONTACT

CONTACT US
SUGGESTION AND COMPLAINT
SUPPORT
KVKK POLİTİKASI




SOCIAL NETWORKS

FACEBOOK TWITTER INSTAGRAM YOUTUBE 







                2020 © All rights reserved by ATAMAN KİMYA. No content and images can be used for permission.            











1980 yılında Cengiz Tuncel, Şelale Kimya' yı devralmış ve 2006 yılında hammadde ithalatı ve ihracatı amacıyla ATAMAN Kimya Ltd' yi kurmuştur. Ataman Kimya 2009 yılında Cengiz Tuncel tarafından bir sonraki nesile devredilmiştir ve 2020 yılında ATAMAN Kimya A.Ş adını almıştır.













