Document Name: role of SOFTISAN 649 in Cover Cream3
Document link: https://www.uspharmacist.com/article/mupirocin-1-in-normal-saline-nasal-suspension























Mupirocin 1% in Normal Saline Nasal Suspension







































Pharmacy Practice



Affordable Medicines
Compliance
Compounding
Drug Approvals
Geriatrics


Hospital/Health System
In-Pharmacy Vaccines
Law
Medication Management
News & Trends


OTC
Pharmacist Resources
Specialty Pharmacy
Technology





Disease State



Allergy
Autoimmune
Breast Cancer
Cardiovascular
Cold & Flu


COVID-19
Dermatology
Diabetes
Gastroenterology
Hematology


HIV/AIDS
Infectious Disease
Infusion
Lung Cancer
Mental Health


mRNA Technology
Neurology
Oncology
Ophthalmology
Orthopedics


Pain Management Pediatrics
Respiratory
Schizophrenia
Urology/Nephrology
Women’s Health





Health Awareness Month


Videos


Patient Teaching Aid


Publications



Featured Issue
Featured Supplements





Conference Coverage


Continuing Education




Subscribe






 COVID-19 Resources 
























Published April 18, 2019

COMPOUNDING

Mupirocin 1% in Normal Saline Nasal Suspension

Loyd V. Allen, Jr., PhDProfessor EmeritusCollege of PharmacyUniversity of Oklahoma, Oklahoma City


  US Pharm. 2019;44(4):47-48. Method of Preparation: Calculate the quantity of each ingredient for the amount to be prepared. Accurately weigh or measure each ingredient. Accurately weigh the quantity of mupirocin 2% ointment. Add sufficient sodium chloride 0.9% solution slowly, with mixing, to final volume. Package and label. Note: Nasal sprays and drops for topical application do not need to be sterile. They need to be sterile only if they are used for nasal inhalation. Use: Mupirocin is an anti-infective agent used in the topical treatment of infections that are caused by Staphylococcus aureus, beta-hemolytic Streptococcus, and Streptococcus pyogenes. Packaging: Package in either a nasal spray or dropper container. Labeling: Keep out of reach of children. Shake well. For the nose. Discard after ____ [time period]. Stability: As a topically applied formulation, a beyond-use date of 30 days may be used for this preparation.1 Quality Control: Quality-control assessment can include weight/volume, pH, specific gravity, active drug assay, color, rheologic properties/pourability, physical observation, and physical stability (discoloration, foreign materials, gas formation, mold growth).2 Discussion: This preparation may be used as either a nasal spray or drops. It is important to clean the tip of the applicator nozzle or dropper following each administration. Mupirocin (Bactroban, Centany, C26H44O9, MW 500.62) occurs as a white to off-white, crystalline solid that is freely soluble in dehydrated alcohol and very slightly soluble in water. This pseudomonic acid antibiotic produced by Pseudomonas fluorescens has a narrow spectrum of activity and is primarily employed against gram-positive bacteria. Mupirocin is used as a topical antibacterial agent in skin infections, especially impetigo, and in nasal carriage of methicillin-resistant S aureus. Each gram of Bactroban 2% ointment contains 20 mg mupirocin in a water-miscible ointment base (polyethylene glycol ointment, NF) consisting of polyethylene glycol 400 and polyethylene glycol 3350.3 As discussed below, it is also available as mupirocin calcium in a cream and as nasal ointment containing paraffin and a mixture of glycerin esters (Softisan 649). However, the nasal ointment cannot be used for this nasal spray or drops because it does not mix well with the sodium chloride 0.9% solution. Mupirocin calcium (Bactroban, MW 1075.34, C52H86CaO18.2H2O) occurs as a white to off-white, crystalline solid that is freely soluble in dehydrated alcohol and is very slightly soluble in water. Note that 2.15 mg of the calcium form is equivalent to 2 mg of mupirocin.3 Bactroban (mupirocin calcium) 2% nasal ointment contains the dihydrate crystalline hemicalcium salt of mupirocin. The nasal ointment is a white to off-white ointment that uses 2.15% w/w mupirocin calcium (equivalent to 2% mupirocin free acid) in a soft, white ointment base. The inactive ingredients are paraffin and a mixture of glycerin esters (Softisan 649).4 Bactroban (mupirocin calcium) 2% cream contains the dihydrate crystalline hemicalcium salt of mupirocin. Bactroban cream is a white cream that contains 2.15% w/w mupirocin calcium (equivalent to 2% mupirocin free acid) in an oil-in-water–based emulsion. The inactive ingredients are benzyl alcohol, cetomacrogol 1000, cetyl alcohol, mineral oil, phenoxyethanol, purified water, stearyl alcohol, and xanthan gum.5 Sodium chloride 0.9% solution contains not less than 95.0% and not more than 105.0% of the labeled amount of sodium chloride in purified water. (Note: Sodium Chloride 0.9% Injection or Sodium Chloride 0.9% for Irrigation may also be used in the formula.) Sodium chloride solutions are chemically and physically stable. Sodium chloride will decrease the solubility of some organic compounds; methylparaben is not as soluble in sodium chloride solutions as it is in water. Sodium chloride is soluble in water to the extent of 1 g in 2.8 mL water, and it is slightly soluble in alcohol (1 g in 250 mL of 95% ethanol).6 REFERENCES 1. U.S. Pharmacopeia/National Formulary [current revision]. Rockville, MD: U.S. Pharmacopeial Convention, Inc; March 2019.2. Allen LV Jr. Standard operating procedure for performing physical quality assessment of oral and topical liquids. IJPC. 1999;3:146-147.3. RxList. Bactroban ointment. www.rxlist.com/bactroban-ointment-drug.htm#indications. Accessed March 6, 2019.4. GSKsource. Bactroban nasal. www.gsksource.com/bactroban_nasal. Accessed March 6, 2019.5. GSKsource. Bactroban cream. https://gsksource.com/bactroban_cream. Accessed March 6, 2019.6. Maximilien JS. Sodium chloride. In: Sheskey PJ, Cook WG, Cable CG, eds. Handbook of Pharmaceutical Excipients. 8th ed. London, England: Pharmaceutical Press; 2017:854-857. To comment on this article, contact rdavidson@uspharmacist.com.



                            Read More On:
                            COMPOUNDING




X













April 2023
In This Issue
Digital Magazine
Archives
Subscription









Related CE


$6.97 Per CE Exam or $59 for 12 Lessons



USP General Chapter <800>: A Pharmacy Professional’s Guide to Handling and Compounding Hazardous Drugs


USP General Chapter <800>: A Pharmacy Professional’s Guide to Handling and Compounding Hazardous Drugs



View More CE






Related Content



Metronidazole Benzoate 80 mg/mL Oral Suspension


Generalized Rash Review


Some Pediatric H1N1 Vaccine Recalled


Comparative Characteristics of Hepatitis A, B, and C














                        
                    












Advertising Contacts
Editorial Staff
Professional Organizations
Submitting a Manuscript
Media Kit





About Us
Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Do Not Sell My Personal InformationManage Preferences



Careers
Classifieds






                    Copyright © 2000 - 2023 Jobson Medical Information LLC unless otherwise noted. All rights reserved. Reproduction in whole or in part without permission is prohibited.

                















×
Full Image



















