Document Name: role of Water, Preservative in Eye Cream3
Document link: https://www.schoolofnaturalskincare.com/natural-preservatives-for-cosmetics/










Natural Preservatives for Skin Care - School of Natural Skincare







































































































 






hello@schoolofnaturalskincare.com
 

Student Log in
The Club Log in
Contact
  
 
 










MENUMENUNew here?



 

Online Courses





Short Courses

Certificate in Natural Face Mask Formulation 
 


Beginners

Certificate in Making Natural Skincare ProductsCertificate in Cold Process Soapmaking 
 


Intermediate

Diploma in Natural Skincare FormulationDiploma in Natural Haircare FormulationDiploma in Formulating Natural Makeup and Advanced Color CosmeticsDiploma in Soap Making 
 


Advanced

Advanced Certificate in High-Performance Serum Formulation 
 


Course bundles

Beginner to FormulatorSkincare SpecialistNatural Haircare and Skincare Formulator 
 
 

Membership Program

Natural Cosmetic Formulation Club

Learn about the ClubFormulating Mineral MakeupNatural Surfactants 

Articles & Recipes

Getting started

Getting startedStudyingWellbeing tips 
Recipes & Formulating

Skincare FormulationHaircare FormulationMakeup FormulationNatural Soap MakingFacial Skincare RecipesBodycare Recipes 
Ingredients/Business

Natural Skincare IngredientsEssential OilsRecommended SuppliersBeauty Business Advice 

About

Our SchoolOur Tutors and TeamAccreditations and MembershipsBookCharity PartnershipsStudent Success StoriesJob Opportunities
FAQ 





Select Page


  
 



 



 







3 Natural preservatives for cosmeticsGetting started, Homepage Highlights, Natural Skincare Ingredients
 






We are frequently asked about natural preservatives for cosmetics. So today we are sharing three broad spectrum preservatives, either derived from natural sources or nature identical, that are readily available, easy to use and carry organic certification.
Would you rather download this guide and learn about natural emulsifiers too? Then click below for your free guide!

 





































 


When and why do you need to use preservatives?
Cosmetic products need to be be preserved in order to prevent microbial spoilage that would make the product unsafe for consumers. 
  Preservatives play a very important function in products containing water: they kill microorganisms and water-borne bacteria, and prevent the growth of bacteria, mold and yeast. If a product contains water (including hydrosols, floral water and aloe vera juice, all of which contain water), a preservative is essential to help prevent microbes growing.
Anhydrous (water-free) products generally don’t require preservatives as they are not prone to microbial contamination. This includes products like lip balms and anhydrous whipped body butters. The exception here is an anhydrous product that might come into contact with water (eg a body scrub or a cleansing balm applied with wet fingers). With these types of products you either need to be very careful not to introduce water to the product during use, or you should include a preservative. 
You will need to use a broad spectrum preservative, which means it is effective against bacteria, mold and yeast.
It’s important to follow the manufacturer’s instructions regarding the amount of preservative to use; too much or too little could be potentially hazardous.
The only way to know that your preservative is working sufficiently is to have a microbiological challenge test carried out by a lab. This is recommended (and in some countries compulsory) if you are selling your products.
Vitamin E, rosemary extract and grapefruit seed extract are not preservatives.





















Here are 3 broad spectrum natural preservatives for cosmetics: 
The preservatives in the list below are all approved for use in certified organic products. They are either derived from natural sources or are nature identical.
REMEMBER: It is your responsibility to check the efficacy of your preservative system. We strongly recommend having a microbiological challenge test carried out by a lab as this is the only way to be completely sure that your preservative system is effective. You can find more information on product testing here: Guide to cosmetic product testing and safety assessments.
1. Preservative Eco
Other trade names include Mikrokill ECT, Geogard ECT and Plantaserv M.
INCI: Benzyl Alcohol (and) Salicylic Acid (and) Glycerin (and) Sorbic Acid
(Meets Ecocert and COSMOS Standards)
This is a broad spectrum preservative which contains four different components: Benzyl Alcohol, Salicylic Acid, Glycerin and Sorbic Acid. These molecules are all found in nature in plants such as pine resin, rowan berries and willow bark. It is a non-paraben, non-formaldehyde, non-isothiazolone based preservative system. 
It’s a liquid that is added to the cooling phase of a cream. It has a slight almond-like smell that is normally not detectable in the finished product. Over time, benzyl alcohol oxidizes to benzaldehyde, which has a strong almond smell. Suitable for use in oil-in-water, water-in-oil and water based formulas, so compatible with a wide range of skin, hair and sun care formulations.
Available from Aromantic (UK). Also sold as Geogard™ ECT available from Voyageur Soap and Candle Company(USA) and Plantaserv M available from New Directions (Australia).
It’s usually used at 1% in water based products.
Not permitted in products for children under the age of three years due to the salicylic acid content.
It is supposed to have a wide pH compatibility of pH 3-8, but it’s most effective at pH below 5.5.




















2. Geogard 221 
INCI: Benzyl Alcohol (and) Dehydroacetic Acid
(Meets Ecocert and COSMOS standards, NaTrue Certified and Soil Association approved)
An Ecocert approved, multi-use, broad spectrum preservative system that is a synergistic blend of an organic acid and alcohol that can be added at room and elevated temperatures. Dehydroacetic Acid and Benzyl Alcohol are both organic compounds which are accepted for use in natural cosmetics, offering a broad spectrum of stability at a wide range of pH. The organic preservative compound is a non-paraben, non-formaldehyde, non isothiazolone based preservative system.
Available from Naturally Thinking (UK), Making Cosmetics (USA) and Go Native (NZ).
It is water soluble with an effective pH from pH 2-6; it’s most efficient at pH below 5.5.
Typical recommended use level is 0.2-1%.




















3. Euxyl K 712/Potassium sorbate and sodium benzoate 
INCI: Sodium Benzoate (and) Potassium Sorbate

Available from Naturallythinking (UK) and The Formulator Shop (Africa).
 


Ecocert-approved mix of two organic acids (sorbic and benzoic acid) commonly used in preserving foods. It is a liquid cosmetic preservative, which can be used in leave-on as well as in rinse-off products. It was developed for use in cosmetic formulations with a skin-friendly pH value of up to 5.5. It has a broad, balanced spectrum of effect against bacteria, yeasts and molds.
 


Its activity greatly depends on the pH of the product; the lower the pH, the higher the activity. It is best used at pH below 5.5, ideally around 4.0-4.5.


Usage rates are between 0.5% and 1.5%. It can be added to the heated water phase, but prolonged heating periods (maximum four hours) above 80°C should be avoided.
 

If you cannot easily obtain Euxyl K 712 you may find it easier to buy sodium benzoate andpotassium sorbate individually (they are widely available separately as powders/pellets). As a replacement for 1% Euxyl K 712 you should add 0.2% potassium sorbate and 0.3% sodium benzoate to your formulation. If you choose to add these, they will need to be added to the water phase and heated until dissolved.




















How can we help you further? 

If you want to develop your knowledge of natural preservatives, then you’ll most definitely want to download your free factsheet, which you can do here. Here you’ll find a list of some of the natural preservatives and emulsifiers that we use and teach students of our courses.


And if you want to make products that are truly safe, stable and effective, you’ll want to enroll with the school by joining one of our accredited and award winning online courses and programs. It is here that you discover the practice, art and science of natural cosmetic formulation, that you develop the confidence and know-how to create your own professional quality natural & organic cosmetic products, either for yourself or to sell.


You see, knowing the right ingredients is useful, but knowing what to do with them, how to use them, when to use, in what quantity to use them in each particular type of product is what counts the most. Knowing how to deliberately select the right ingredients for the type of product you are making, ensuring that is suits the person it is intended for is something you’ll discover on our Diploma in Natural Skincare Formulation (for skincare) and Diploma in Natural Haircare Formulation (for haircare).
 

So now, go ahead and download your free guide (I mean it is free, so why not!), then go and check out the webpage for the Diploma in Natural Skincare Formulation and/or the Diploma in Natural Haircare Formulation – you can even do them both together in our Natural Haircare & Skincare Formulator Program!

Any questions? 

Just email us at hello@schoolofnaturalskincare.com – we’re on hand to help.
 



Want to know more about natural emulsifiers and preservatives?
Discover the most natural emulsifiers and preservatives for your skincare products by downloading our free guide!

 





































 




Loved learning about natural preservatives? Save this image below on Pinterest so you can be sure to remember!
























 

You might also like:


















Natural Preservatives in Skincare: What You Need to Know


















From Hobbyist to Entrepreneur: How One Natural Skincare…


















How to turn a skincare recipe into a cosmetic formula


















Formulating Natural Makeup vs Natural Skincare: What's…


















Formulating Natural, Organic and Vegan Makeup and Color…


















Learning the Art of Natural Cosmetics: How the School of…

























Become a naturalskincare formulator!Sign up for our free newsletter and get our best product making tips, expert formulating advice and course offers... plus our Natural Beauty Recipe Book.
We take care of your data in accordance with our privacy policy. 
 



















Yes! Sign me up






You have Successfully Subscribed!




  

 
 
 










Sign up for our newsletter to receive our best tips, course offers and NaturalBeauty Recipe BookWe take care of your data in accordance with our privacy policy.














Yes! Sign me up






You have Successfully Subscribed!




See what our students are saying…This class has been so awesome!“This class has been so awesome! Formulating is so much fun after all!”Raquel LoVetere Curtin, USAThe Diploma in Natural Skincare Formulation was simply extraordinary!“The Diploma in Natural Skincare Formulation was simply extraordinary! It exceeded my expectations.”Heather Weinbauer-Literski, USAI’m truly delighted“I must confess this course is good value for money. Honestly all I expected was the course material and a certificate! I’m truly delighted with this extra bonus and all the prompt online support we get!”Mary Um Mustafa, UKThis course is the one you want… trust me!“I had my eye on this course for over a year. I was choosing between this course and two others. I decided to start with another one, and to be honest I made a huge mistake – I should have gotten this one from the beginning because it is SO detailed and gives you everything you need to become a great formulator! It is mapped out in such a way that is so easy to understand and you are excited to keep going. The course helped me to really grasp the information and take it in. Maybe there are other people out there deciding between courses… don’t go with the others! You will end up frustrated like I was. This course is the one you want… trust me!”Tamara Hinds, CanadaI gained priceless knowledge“I gained priceless knowledge and it has now given me the motivation to pursue an interest and hopefully a business. Thank you!” Femi Robinson, UKThe results are bombastic!“Now I’ve completed the Certificate in Making Natural Skincare Products, I really want to say a BIG thank you for teaching me this knowledge! I continued experimenting with my own products, such as a serum oil for congested oily skin and blocked pores. The results are bombastic! Only one overnight application and next morning the blackheads and whiteheads were easily removed! My oil massage works great, especially for the joints, and it healed cramped and numb muscles.I recommend the Certificate in Making Natural Skincare Products with the School of Natural Skincare for those who want to learn how to make their own skincare products. You can sign up at any time and it really sets you up for a bright future with your own skincare business!”Carol Rudy Darius, AustraliaI have really enjoyed all the inspirations“I have really enjoyed all the inspirations and different ways of thinking about my future that your courses have opened up for me! Thanks for all your amazing work”Liv Henrich, New ZealandI have loved doing every aspect of the course“I have loved doing every aspect of the course and can’t wait to keep improving on these skills with other products” Leonie Turenne, AustraliaThe course has revolutionised my life!“The course has revolutionised my life! My skin is so much healthier and full of life. You are truly an inspiration!”Lu Brown, UKMy clients are loving the new creations I am making.“My clients are loving the new creations I am making. I am so happy I came across your site and decided to take this course.”Veerpal Sidhu, CanadaI found the course addictive!“I found the course addictive! I have come a long way in the last few months with my formulating and have found the course to be exactly what I needed”Carol White, UKProudly seen inFind Us on Facebook 
School of Natural Skincare


We’re accredited!Follow us         

Study with usCertificate in Making Natural Skincare Products
Diploma in Natural Skincare Formulation
Diploma in Natural Haircare Formulation
Advanced Certificate in High-Performance Serum Formulation
Other informationStudent log in


Search for:



 
 
 
 




 The School of Natural Skincare International is a multi-award-winning online natural cosmetic formulation school. Our accredited, multimedia online courses cover every aspect of skincare and haircare formulation and are studied from home, wherever our students are in the world, via our online classroom, and with tutor and community support every step of the way.

Company Information Privacy Notice
Terms and Conditions
Anti-racism Statement
The School of Natural Skincare is a trading name of Goodness & Wonder Ltd, Company Registration Number: 8844378. Registered address 432 Gloucester Road, Bristol, BS7 8TX, UK. VAT registration number GB204082453.

Get in touch We’re here to help and assist you. If you have any questions, you can send us an email at hello@schoolofnaturalskincare.com or use our contact page.

Get social with us          

 




© 2010 - 2022 School of Natural Skincare | All Rights Reserved 
 









Pin It on Pinterest





Shares


















 









Save $200 and get 3 bonus classes FREE when you enroll onto our Diploma in Natural Skincare Formulation. Offer Ends May 4th. 

















 : 






 : 






 : 
























Learn More.














































































