Document Name: role of White Petrolatum in Eye Cream1
Document link: https://www.webmd.com/drugs/2/drug-20758/white-petrolatum-mineral-oil-ophthalmic-eye/details




White Petrolatum-Mineral Oil Ophthalmic (Eye): Uses, Side Effects, Interactions, Pictures, Warnings & Dosing - WebMD




 


























 Skip to main content  Check Your Symptoms  Find A Doctor  Find A Dentist Health  A-Z Health A-Z  Common Conditions   ADD/ADHD  Allergies  Arthritis  Cancer  Coronavirus (COVID-19)  Depression  Diabetes  Eye Health  Heart Disease  Lung Disease  Orthopedics  Pain Management  Sexual Conditions  Skin Problems  Sleep Disorders  View All  Resources   Symptom Checker  WebMD Blogs  Podcasts  Newsletters  WebMD Magazine  Best Hospitals  Find a Doctor  Surgeries and Procedures A-Z  Featured Topics  Slideshow  Signs You Have Already Had COVID  Slideshow  Get Help for Migraine Relief Drugs &  Supplements Drugs & Supplements  Find & Review   Drugs  Supplements  Drug Basics & Safety   Commonly Abused Drugs  Taking Meds When Pregnant  Tools   Manage Your Medications  Pill Identifier  Check for Interactions  Drug Comparison Tool  Featured Topics  Slideshow  Vitamins You Need as You Age  Coronavirus  COVID-19 Vaccines Living  Healthy Living Healthy  Diet, Food & Fitness   Diet & Weight Management  Weight Loss & Obesity  Food & Recipes  Fitness & Exercise  Beauty & Balance   Healthy Beauty  Health & Balance  Sex & Relationships  Oral Care  Living Well   Women's Health  Men's Health  Aging Well  Healthy Sleep  Healthy Teens  Featured Topics  Article  Smart Grocery Shopping When You Have Diabetes  Quiz  Do You Know the Benefits of Walking? Family &  Pregnancy Family & Pregnancy  All About Pregnancy   Getting Pregnant  First Trimester  Second Trimester  Third Trimester  View All  Parenting Guide   Newborn & Baby  Children's Health  Children's Vaccines  View All  Pet Care Essentials   Healthy Cats  Healthy Dogs  View All  Featured Topics  Slideshow  Smart Snacks When You're Pregnant  Slideshow  Surprising Things You Didn't Know About Dogs and Cats News &  Experts News & Experts  Health News   Simple Test Could Assess Risk of Dementia  You May Not Need 10,000 Steps a Day  Long COVID Treatment Isn't ‘One-Size-Fits-All’  ‘Stuck’ Stem Cells May Be to Blame for Gray Hair  Sleep Apnea May Cause Cognitive Problems  Experts & Community   Support Groups  Blogs  Webinars  News Center  New Book: Take Control of Your Heart Disease Risk  Featured Topics  WebMD Editorial Special  MINOCA: The Heart Attack You Didn’t See Coming  Get Our Newsletters  Health News and Information, Delivered to Your Inbox  Sign In  Mobile Apps  Subscriptions  Privacy and More  Sign In  Subscribe  MENU DRUGS AND MEDICATIONS CENTERFind a DrugMy MedicinePill IdentifierInteraction CheckerFind a VitaminFind a PharmacyVITAMINS & SUPPLEMENTS CENTERFind a Vitamin or SupplementVitamin Lifestyle GuideAssess Your Vitamin NeedsFIRST AID RESOURCESFirst Aid HomeFirst Aid Kit & Wound CareFirst Aid Mobile Drugs & Medications  White Petrolatum-Mineral Oil Ointment  White Petrolatum-Mineral Oil Ointment - Uses, Side Effects, and More Generic Name(S): white petrolatum-mineral oil  View Free Coupon  Uses  Side Effects  Precautions  Interactions  Overdose  Images  Reviews (1)  Uses This medication is used to relieve dry, irritated eyes. Common causes for dry eyes include wind, sun, heating/air conditioning, computer use/reading, and certain medications.This product may contain 1 or more of the following ingredients: carboxymethylcellulose, dextran, glycerin, hypromellose, polyethylene glycol 400 (PEG 400), polysorbate, polyvinyl alcohol, povidone, or propylene glycol, among others.Eye lubricants keep the eye moist, help to protect the eye from injury and infection, and decrease symptoms of dry eyes such as burning, itching, and feeling as if something is in the eye. How to use White Petrolatum-Mineral Oil Ointment Follow all directions on the product package. If you have any questions, ask your doctor or pharmacist. Do not use a solution that has changed color or is cloudy. Certain brands (containing glycerin with polysorbates, among other ingredients) may have a milky appearance. This is okay as long as the solution does not change color. Some eye drops need to be shaken before use. Check the label to see if you should shake your product before using.Usually, drops may be used as often as needed. Ointments are usually used 1 to 2 times daily as needed. If using an ointment once a day, it may be best to use it at bedtime.To apply eye ointment/drops/gels: Wash hands first. To avoid contamination, be careful not to touch the dropper or top of the ointment tube or let it touch your eye. Always replace the cap tightly after each use. Tilt your head back, look up, and pull down the lower eyelid to make a pouch. For drops/gels, place the dropper directly over the eye and squeeze out 1 or 2 drops as needed. Look down and gently close your eye for 1 or 2 minutes. Place one finger at the corner of the eye near the nose and apply gentle pressure. This will prevent the medication from draining away from the eye. For an ointment, hold the tube directly over the eye and gently squeeze a small strip (one-fourth of an inch or roughly 6 millimeters) of ointment into the pouch. Release the eyelid, close the eye, and slowly roll your eye in all directions to spread the medication. Blot away any extra ointment from around the eye with a clean tissue.If you are also using another kind of eye medication (such as drops or ointments), wait at least 5 minutes before applying other medications. Use eye drops before eye ointments to allow the eye drops to enter the eye.If you wear contact lenses, remove them before using most kinds of eye lubricants. Ask your doctor or pharmacist when you may replace your contact lenses. There are a few types of eye lubricants (some that contain polysorbates) that can be used while wearing contact lenses. Check the package to see if you can wear your contact lenses while using your product.Tell your doctor if your condition lasts or gets worse after 3 days. Side Effects Vision may be temporarily blurred when this product is first used. Also, minor burning/stinging/irritation may temporarily occur. If any of these effects last or get worse, tell your doctor or pharmacist promptly.If your doctor has directed you to use this medication, remember that your doctor has judged that the benefit to you is greater than the risk of side effects. Many people using this medication do not have serious side effects.Tell your doctor right away if you have any serious side effects, including: eye pain, change in vision, continued eye redness/irritation.A very serious allergic reaction to this drug is rare. However, get medical help right away if you notice any symptoms of a serious allergic reaction, including: rash, itching/swelling (especially of the face/tongue/throat), severe dizziness, trouble breathing.This is not a complete list of possible side effects. If you notice other effects not listed above, contact your doctor or pharmacist. In the US - Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report side effects to FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or at www.fda.gov/medwatch.In Canada - Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report side effects to Health Canada at 1-866-234-2345. Precautions Before using this product, tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to it; or if you have any other allergies. This product may contain inactive ingredients, which can cause allergic reactions or other problems. Talk to your pharmacist for more details.If you have any health problems, consult your doctor or pharmacist before using this product.After you apply this product, your vision may become temporarily blurred. Do not drive, use machinery, or do any activity that requires clear vision until you can do it safely. Interactions Drug interactions may change how your medications work or increase your risk for serious side effects. This document does not contain all possible drug interactions. Keep a list of all the products you use (including prescription/nonprescription drugs and herbal products) and share it with your doctor and pharmacist. Do not start, stop, or change the dosage of any medicines without your doctor's approval. Does White Petrolatum-Mineral Oil Ointment interact with other drugs you are taking?  Enter your medication into the WebMD interaction checker  Check Interaction  Overdose This medicine may be harmful if swallowed. If someone has overdosed and has serious symptoms such as passing out or trouble breathing, call 911. Otherwise, call a poison control center right away. US residents can call their local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. Canada residents can call a provincial poison control center. Notes Some products contain preservatives that may damage contact lenses or cause irritation in persons with allergies. For more information, check your product package or talk with your health care professional. Missed Dose This medication is usually used only as needed. Storage Refer to storage information printed on the package. Protect ointments from freezing. Some preservative-free drops that come in single-use vials/droppers should be discarded either immediately after use or up to 12 hours after opening. Check your product package to see when you should discard your preservative-free product. If you have any questions about storage, ask your pharmacist. Keep all medications away from children and pets.Do not flush medications down the toilet or pour them into a drain unless instructed to do so. Properly discard this product when it is expired or no longer needed. Consult your pharmacist or local waste disposal company. Images  Next Free RX CouponSave up to 80% on your prescriptions. View FREE WebMDRx coupon Available coupons Save up to 80% on your prescription with  WebMDRx  View FREE WebMDRx coupon You Might Also Like Cold or Flu? How to Tell  Treating Opioid Use Disorder With Medications  Taking Prescription Opioids?  Navigating Life With Migraine Related Links Who should not take White Petrolatum-Mineral Oil Ointment?  What conditions does White Petrolatum-Mineral Oil Ointment treat?  Search Drugs  Related Drugs Common Searches  Adderall  Celexa  Cipro  Cymbalta  Flexeril  Hydrocodone  Prilosec  Prozac  Seroquel  Synthroid  Tramadol  Trazodone  Lexapro  Lisinopril  Mobic  Naproxen  Neurontin  Pradaxa  Prednisone  Vicodin  Warfarin  Wellbutrin  Xanax  Zocor  Zoloft  Show More  Show Less  Select a condition to view a list of medication options  dry eye  keratoconjunctivitis sicca, or dry and inflamed cornea and conjunctiva of the eye  Drug Survey  Have you ever purchased White Petrolatum-Mineral Oil Ointment? Yes, In the past 3 monthsYes, In the past 6 monthsYes, In the past yearHaven't purchased but consideringDon't plan to purchase This survey is being conducted by the WebMD marketing sciences department.  Selected from data included with permission and copyrighted by First Databank, Inc. This copyrighted material has been downloaded from a licensed data provider and is not for distribution, except as may be authorized by the applicable terms of use.  CONDITIONS OF USE: The information in this database is intended to supplement, not substitute for, the expertise and judgment of healthcare professionals. The information is not intended to cover all possible uses, directions, precautions, drug interactions or adverse effects, nor should it be construed to indicate that use of a particular drug is safe, appropriate or effective for you or anyone else. A healthcare professional should be consulted before taking any drug, changing any diet or commencing or discontinuing any course of treatment. Today on WebMD Medications That Make You Tired  Common culprits and what you can do.  Pharmacy and Medication Tips  Things to remember when you fill your prescription.  Medication Side Effects  Tips for dealing with them.  Reading Medicine Labels  How to make sense of them. More About Drugs and MedicationsPill IdentifierMy MedicineInteraction CheckerDrugs and Medications A-ZDrugs and Medical ConditionsLatest Drug NewsFind a Pharmacy Find a Vitamin Health Solutions from Our Sponsors Penis Curved When Erect?  Could I have CAD?  Treat Bent Fingers  Treat HR+, HER2- MBC  Tired of Dandruff?  Benefits of CBD  Rethink MS Treatment  AFib-Related Strokes  Risk of a Future DVT/PE  Is My Penis Normal?  Relapsing MS Options  Liver Transplants Save Lives  Finance Plastic Surgery  Bent Finger Causes  Living With Psoriasis?  Missing Teeth? More from WebMD 5 Tips to Help With Relapsing MS  How to Thrive With Narcolepsy  Relief for Blocked Hair Follicles  Psoriatic Arthritis and Your Sleep  What Psoriasis Feels Like  First Psoriatic Arthritis Flare  Talking to Your Doctor About RA  Crohn's: A 'Full-Body' Disease  Avoiding Crohn’s Flares  Health Benefits of Hemp Seed Oil  Live Better With Psoriatic Disease  Types of B-Cell Therapy for MS  5 Health Benefits of Hemp  Why Prostate Cancer Spreads  Living with Advanced Breast Cancer  Where Breast Cancer Spreads  Find us on:  Facebook  Twitter  Pinterest  Policies  Privacy Policy  Cookie Policy  Editorial Policy  Advertising Policy  Correction Policy  Terms of Use  About  Contact Us  About WebMD  Careers  Newsletter  Corporate  WebMD Health Services  Site Map  Accessibility  Our Apps  WebMD Mobile  WebMD App  Pregnancy  Baby  Allergy  For Advertisers  Advertise with Us  Advertising Policy © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, an Internet Brands company. All rights reserved.WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information. 








