Document Name: role of White Petrolatum in Eye Cream2
Document link: https://www.fda.gov/safety/recalls-market-withdrawals-safety-alerts/global-pharma-healthcare-issues-voluntary-nationwide-recall-delsam-pharma-artificial-eye-ointment





































Global Pharma Healthcare Issues Voluntary Nationwide Recall of Delsam Pharma Artificial Eye Ointment Due to Possible Microbial Contamination | FDA









Skip to main content
Skip to FDA Search
Skip to in this section menu
Skip to footer links

 

 




An official website of the United States government
Here’s how you know  





The .gov means it’s official.Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing sensitive information, make sure you're on a federal government site.





The site is secure. The https:// ensures that you are connecting to the official website and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely.









U.S. Food and Drug Administration





 
Search


 
Menu






Search FDA


Submit search





 

Featured

Contact FDA
FDA Guidance Documents
Recalls, Market Withdrawals and Safety Alerts
Press Announcements
Warning Letters
Advisory Committees
En Español





Products

Food
Drugs
Medical Devices
Radiation-Emitting Products
Vaccines, Blood, and Biologics
Animal and Veterinary
Cosmetics
Tobacco Products



Topics

About FDA
Combination Products
Regulatory Information
Safety
Emergency Preparedness
International Programs
News and Events
Training and Continuing Education
Inspections and Compliance
Science and Research



Information For

Consumers
Patients
Industry
Health Professionals
Federal, State and Local Officials









In this section:

                Recalls, Market Withdrawals, & Safety Alerts
    
    





                                        Recalls, Market Withdrawals, & Safety Alerts
                    



Recall Resources 








Enforcement Reports
Industry Guidance For Recalls
Major Product Recalls
Archive for Recalls, Market Withdrawals & Safety Alerts












Home


Safety


Recalls, Market Withdrawals, & Safety Alerts


Global Pharma Healthcare Issues Voluntary Nationwide Recall of Delsam Pharma Artificial Eye Ointment Due to Possible Microbial Contamination





     Recalls, Market Withdrawals, & Safety Alerts
    








COMPANY ANNOUNCEMENT
Global Pharma Healthcare Issues Voluntary Nationwide Recall of Delsam Pharma Artificial Eye Ointment Due to Possible Microbial Contamination

When a company announces a recall, market withdrawal, or safety alert, the FDA posts the company's announcement as a public service. FDA does not endorse either the product or the company.
Read Announcement View Product Photos




Share


Tweet


Linkedin


Email


Print









Summary


Company Announcement Date:
February 24, 2023

FDA Publish Date:
February 24, 2023

Product Type:
Drugs                          
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
             
            
            
            
              
            
            
                          
Reason for Announcement:


Recall Reason Description
Due to possible microbial contamination


Company Name:
Global Pharma Healthcare
Brand Name:


Brand Name(s)

Delsam Pharma’s



Product Description:


Product Description

Artificial Eye Ointment






Company Announcement
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE - February 24, 2023, Global Pharma Healthcare is voluntarily recalling Batch No. H29 of Artificial Eye Ointment, distributed by Delsam Pharma to the consumer level, due to possible microbial contamination. Additionally, some product packaging is leaking or may otherwise be compromised.
Risk Statement: Use of contaminated eye ointment may cause adverse events, including infection in the eye that could lead to blindness. To date, Global Pharma Healthcare has not received any reports of adverse events related to this product.
Artificial Eye Ointment (mineral oil 15%, white petrolatum 83%, 3.5 grams / 1/8 oz.) is used as an eye lubricant and to relieve dryness of the eyes. The affected product is packaged in a white aluminum tube within a paper carton. The product can be identified by the photos provided below. The product was distributed nationwide in the United States, and by Delsam through internet retail sites. Delsam Pharma’s NDC for this product is 72570-122-35, and its UPC code is 3 72570 12235 3.
Global Pharma Healthcare is notifying the brand owner and importer of this product, Delsam Pharma, about this recall, and is requesting that wholesalers, retailers, and customers who have the recalled product should stop any use and discard the product safely and appropriately.
Consumers with questions regarding this recall can contact the distributor Delsam Pharma, LLC by phone at 1-866-826-1306 or by e-mail at delsampharma@yahoo.com from Monday to Friday from 11am to 4pm EST.
Consumers should contact their physician or healthcare provider if they have experienced any problems that may be related to using these over-the-counter drug products.
Adverse reactions or quality problems experienced with the use of this product may be reported to the FDA's MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program either online, by regular mail or by fax.
Complete and submit the report Online: www.fda.gov/medwatch/report.htm
Regular Mail or Fax: Download form www.fda.gov/MedWatch/getforms.htm or call 1-800-332-1088 to request a reporting form, then complete and return to the address on the pre-addressed form, or submit by fax to 1-800-FDA-0178
This recall is being conducted with the knowledge of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.


Company Contact Information



Consumers:
distributor Delsam Pharma, LLC
 1-866-826-1306
 delsampharma@yahoo.com










Product Photos




 























Content current as of:
02/24/2023






Regulated Product(s)

Drugs





Follow FDA

Follow @US_FDA on Twitter
Follow FDA on Facebook
Follow @FDArecalls on Twitter
Recent Recalled Product Photos on FDA's Flickr Photostream




 







 More Recalls, Market 
    Withdrawals, & 
    Safety Alerts




                                        Recalls, Market Withdrawals, & Safety Alerts
                      



Recall Resources 








Enforcement Reports
Industry Guidance For Recalls
Major Product Recalls
Archive for Recalls, Market Withdrawals & Safety Alerts













 






Footer Links



FDA Archive
About FDA
Accessibility




Visitor Information 
Website Policies / Privacy
No FEAR Act
Vulnerability Disclosure Policy




FOIA
HHS.gov
USA.gov






Contact FDA


Follow FDA on Facebook




Follow FDA on Twitter




Follow FDA on Instagram





Follow FDA on LinkedIn




View FDA videos on YouTube




Subscribe to FDA RSS feeds





FDA Homepage



 
Contact Number
      1-888-INFO-FDA (1-888-463-6332)
    




Back to Top





