Document Name: role of Talc in Cover Cream2
Document link: https://www.drugwatch.com/talcum-powder/is-talc-in-makeup-safe/




  
































Is Talc in Makeup Safe? | Side Effects & Talc-Free Makeup




























 Skip to main content






    Drugwatch.com







High-Risk Drugs & Devices
                
 




Drugs
                                                                






Elmiron
                                                                






Elmiron Side Effects
                




Belviq
                                                                






Belviq Side Effects
                




Xeljanz
                                                                






Xeljanz Side Effects
                




Tepezza
                                                                






Tepezza Side Effects
                




Taxotere
                                                                






Taxotere Side Effects
                




EzriCare & Delsam Artificial Tears
                                                                






EzriCare & Delsam Eye Drop Side Effects
                




Singulair
                


Proton Pump Inhibitors (PPIs)
                                                                






Nexium
                


Prilosec
                




Tylenol
                






Devices
                                                                






Hip Replacement
                                                                






Hip Replacement Complications
                




Hernia Mesh
                                                                






Hernia Mesh Complications
                




Allergan Breast Implants
                                                                






Allergan Breast Implant Recalls
                




IVC Filter
                                                                






IVC Filter Complications
                




Transvaginal Mesh
                                                                






Transvaginal Mesh Complications
                




Philips CPAP
                                                                






Philips CPAP Recall
                




Exactech Replacements
                







Health Issues
                
 




Side Effects
                


Health Guides
                                                                






Women
                                                                






Pregnancy
                


Birth Control
                




Conditions
                                                                






Cancer
                


Maculopathy
                


Sleep Apnea
                


Crohn’s Disease
                




Personal Health
                                                                






Men
                


Children
                


Seniors
                


Mental Health
                




Consumer Resources
                                                                






Drug Interactions
                


How to Request Medical Records
                


How to Read a Drug Label
                


Big Pharma
                








Patient Stories
                











 Latest Story


Testing Positive for COVID-19: It Felt Like I Had a Compression Belt Around My Chest






Featured Articles
                











 Featured Article


COVID-19: A Consumer’s Guide to the Coronavirus

April 6, 2020








Active Lawsuits
                
 




Lawsuits Directory
                                                                






Prescription Drug Lawsuits
                                                                






Elmiron Lawsuits
                


Xeljanz Lawsuits
                


Proton Pump Inhibitor Lawsuits
                


Singulair Lawsuits
                


Tepezza Lawsuit
                


EzriCare & Delsam Artificial Tears Lawsuits
                




Product Lawsuits
                                                                






Chemical Hair Straightener Lawsuits
                


NEC Baby Formula Lawsuit
                


Roundup Lawsuit
                




Medical Device Lawsuits
                                                                






Philips CPAP Lawsuits
                


Hernia Mesh Lawsuits
                


Exactech Replacement Lawsuits
                


Hip Replacement Lawsuit
                


Paragard Lawsuits
                










Injured by a prescription drug or defective medical device?

Get a Free Case Review








Our Community
                
 




About Drugwatch
                                                                






Our Team
                                                                






Drugwatch Editorial Policy
                


Press Room
                




Our Trusted Legal Partners
                                                                






Awards & Accreditations
                


Drugwatch FAQ
                






Our Expert Contributors
                











Jayne Conroy, Esquire
Trial Attorney and Pharmaceutical Litigation Expert












Carl V. Crawford, M.D.
Gastroenterologist/Hepatologist












Gopal Badlani, M.D.
Board-Certified Urologist












Trent B. Miracle, Esquire
Trial Attorney and Pharmaceutical Litigation Expert







News
                











 Latest News


Philips Recalls Some Remediated DreamStation CPAP, BiPAP Devices

April 20, 2023





Drugwatch Podcast
                











 Latest Podcast


Erika Sward of American Lung Association Reveals the Dangers of Vaping and IQOS

August 31, 2020









SPEAK WITH AN EXPERT
Call Now
(855) 547-5876


 Who Am I Calling?
                






(855) 547-5876Call Now







click to open search box


Search




 
Menu






 




 





Home  Talcum Powder  Makeup
Talc in Makeup
Talc, or talcum powder, is a key ingredient in cosmetic makeup. There are concerns over its safety because of its potential to be tainted with asbestos, a toxic mineral. Lawsuits against talc manufacturers have been filed by those alleging the contaminated talc caused their illnesses.










By
Kevin Connolly


Edited By
Anastasia Climan, RDN, CD-N


This page features
20 Cited Research Articles



Last Modified: December 29, 2022


Fact Checked


Fact-Checked




Editors carefully fact-check all Drugwatch content for accuracy and quality.
Drugwatch has a stringent fact-checking process. It starts with our strict sourcing guidelines.
We only gather information from credible sources. This includes peer-reviewed medical journals, reputable media outlets, government reports, court records and interviews with qualified experts.


Why Trust DrugWatch?


Drugwatch.com has been empowering patients for more than a decade


Drugwatch.com has provided reliable, trusted information about medications, medical devices and general health since 2008. We’ve also connected thousands of people injured by drugs and medical devices with top-ranked national law firms to take action against negligent corporations.

        Our team includes experienced medical writers, award-winning journalists, researchers and certified medical and legal experts. Drugwatch.com is HONCode (Health On the Net Foundation) certified. This means the high-quality information we provide comes from credible sources, such as peer-reviewed medical journals and expert interviews.
The information on Drugwatch.com has been medically and legally reviewed by more than 30 expert contributors, including doctors, pharmacists, lawyers, patient advocates and other health care professionals. Our writers are members of professional associations, including American Medical Writers Association, American Bar Association, The Alliance of Professional Health Advocates and International Society for Medical Publication Professionals.
About Drugwatch.com



Assisting patients and their families since 2008.
Helped more than 12,000 people find legal help.
A+ rating from the Better Business Bureau.
5-star reviewed medical and legal information site.



Learn More About Us
Testimonials


"Drugwatch opened my eyes to the realities of big pharmacy. Having a family member with major depression and anxiety, I was looking for information on her medications. I found information that was very helpful, that her psychiatrist never told her."

Marianne Zahren
Patient’s Family Member


































 



Cosmetic Use of Talc

Talc is a common ingredient used in blush, eyeshadow, foundation and many other beauty products. The soft mineral gives makeup a silky texture that makes it easier to apply. Talc also absorbs oil, prevents caking and makes facial makeup more translucent.
Cosmetic uses of talc date back centuries. Egyptians used the mineral to lighten their skin. People in China made similar face powders from rice powder mixed with ground talc and a type of clay called kaolin.
The manufacturing of cosmetics is a multibillion-dollar industry today, and one that relies heavily on the use of talc.



            The following makeup products often contain talc:
        


Blush

Bronzer

Concealer

Eyebrow pencil

Eyeliner

Eye shadow

Face masks

Face powder

Foundation

Lipstick

Lotion

Mascara

Moisturizing cream

Rouge




The amount of talc in makeup differs depending on the product. Face powders often contain up to 100% talc, according to a safety report from the Cosmetic Ingredient Review Expert Panel. Other products, such as aerosol makeup bases, can contain up to 35% talc. 

Asbestos-Contaminated Talc in Makeup

Talc and asbestos are naturally occurring minerals that can form near one another beneath the Earth’s surface. This heightens the risk of asbestos-contaminated talc finding its way into makeup products. 
Asbestos, although highly toxic, was used for decades in industries such as construction, firefighting, shipbuilding and more because of its heat resistance. It was also used in many household products. 
The Environmental Working Group in 2020 presented results of tests by the Scientific Analytical Institute, which found asbestos in three of 21 cosmetic products (14%). The products included two eye shadow pallets and one toy makeup kit marketed to children. In 2019, tests done on adult and children’s makeup products found traces of asbestos contamination.
A 2018 study by the U.S. Public Interest Research Group reported high levels of asbestos in three types of makeup sold by Claire’s. The retailer has since declared bankruptcy. That same year, Justice, a retail clothing store owned by Ascena Retail Group Inc., recalled eight “Just Shine” makeup products that contained the toxic fibrous mineral.
Long-term exposure to asbestos increases the risks of cancers, particularly mesothelioma. Exposure to asbestos also raises the risk of ovarian cancer and laryngeal cancer. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration warns that there is no safe level of exposure to asbestos.



Were you diagnosed with ovarian cancer or mesothelioma after using talcum powder?

Get A Free Case Review



Other Potential Links to Cancer

The World Health Organization’s International Agency for Research on Cancer has deemed genital use of talcum powder possibly carcinogenic to humans. 
Various studies have concluded that the long-term use of talcum powder near the genital area may increase a woman’s risk of developing ovarian cancer by 30% to 60%. Researchers found talc particles deeply embedded in the tissue of ovarian and cervical tumors of women who for decades used the powder near their genitals. 
Some researchers — and plaintiffs in legal claims — claim talcum powder causes the rare cancer mesothelioma, which is caused by exposure to asbestos. Other diseases linked to talcum powder include lung cancer, uterine cancer and cervical cancer.
A working group for the International Agency for Research on Cancer published a study that said, in part, that limited evidence existed that talc without asbestos or asbestiform fibers was cancerous to mice and hamsters. Nonasbestos talc use by humans on the perineum was “possibly carcinogenic,” but the same talc, when inhaled, did not lead to cancer.
Another small, older study found that 75% of women with ovarian or cervical cancer had talc particles in their cancerous tumors. Researchers found particles concentrated deep and non-dispersed in tumorous tissues. Other studies, however, have not connected talc and cancer. 













 Related News


Johnson & Johnson Loses $37.2M in Talcum Powder Cancer Case









Emily Miller
October 10, 2019












            Please seek the advice of a medical professional before making health care decisions.
        


Share This Page:


Share this page on Twitter



Share this page on Facebook



Copy Link




Share This Page:
https://www.drugwatch.com/talcum-powder/is-talc-in-makeup-safe/
Copy Link



Related Pages


Talcum Powder Overview


Lawsuits


Additional Diseases


Makeup


Mesothelioma


Ovarian Cancer


Recalls


Settlement


Talc and Cancer








 
 
 


TELL US WHAT YOU THINK
Did You Find Drugwatch Helpful?

Yes
No



Thank you for your feedback. Do you have any thoughts you'd like to share about Drugwatch.com?


This article changed my life!


This article was informative


I have a question




How can we improve this page?


This article contains incorrect information


This article doesn't have the information I'm looking for


I have a question




How can we improve this page?





Full Name



Full Name



Email




Type Your Message Here







Send Your Message





Thank You for Your Feedback
We appreciate your feedback. One of our content team members will be in touch with you soon.
We appreciate your feedback. One of our content team members will be in touch with you soon.









By
Kevin Connolly


Edited By
Anastasia Climan, RDN, CD-N


This page features
20 Cited Research Articles



Last Modified: December 29, 2022


Fact Checked


Fact-Checked




Editors carefully fact-check all Drugwatch content for accuracy and quality.
Drugwatch has a stringent fact-checking process. It starts with our strict sourcing guidelines.
We only gather information from credible sources. This includes peer-reviewed medical journals, reputable media outlets, government reports, court records and interviews with qualified experts.


Why Trust DrugWatch?


Drugwatch.com has been empowering patients for more than a decade


Drugwatch.com has provided reliable, trusted information about medications, medical devices and general health since 2008. We’ve also connected thousands of people injured by drugs and medical devices with top-ranked national law firms to take action against negligent corporations.

        Our team includes experienced medical writers, award-winning journalists, researchers and certified medical and legal experts. Drugwatch.com is HONCode (Health On the Net Foundation) certified. This means the high-quality information we provide comes from credible sources, such as peer-reviewed medical journals and expert interviews.
The information on Drugwatch.com has been medically and legally reviewed by more than 30 expert contributors, including doctors, pharmacists, lawyers, patient advocates and other health care professionals. Our writers are members of professional associations, including American Medical Writers Association, American Bar Association, The Alliance of Professional Health Advocates and International Society for Medical Publication Professionals.
About Drugwatch.com



Assisting patients and their families since 2008.
Helped more than 12,000 people find legal help.
A+ rating from the Better Business Bureau.
5-star reviewed medical and legal information site.



Learn More About Us
Testimonials


"Drugwatch opened my eyes to the realities of big pharmacy. Having a family member with major depression and anxiety, I was looking for information on her medications. I found information that was very helpful, that her psychiatrist never told her."

Marianne Zahren
Patient’s Family Member


































 



On This Page


Overview


Asbestos Contamination


Links to Cancer




Related Pages


Talcum Powder Overview


Lawsuits


Additional Diseases


Makeup


Mesothelioma


Ovarian Cancer


Recalls


Settlement


Talc and Cancer








Diagnosed with ovarian cancer or mesothelioma after talcum powder use?

Free Case Review














Previous Topic
Additional Diseases





Next Topic
Mesothelioma








            Related News
        













Johnson & Johnson Agrees to $8.9 Billion Talc Settlement

April 5, 2023















Unsealed Emails Reveal J&J’s Influence on Talc and Cancer Report

December 15, 2021
















Written By
Kevin Connolly
Editor



Email



Kevin Connolly joined Drugwatch in 2016 after 20 years as a newspaper reporter and editor. He is a member of the International Society for Medical Publication Professionals, the Drug Information Association and Investigative Reporters and Editors. Some of his qualifications include:

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention certificates in Health Literacy
Bachelor of Arts in Mass Communications from University of South Florida
Classes completed at Seminole State College of Florida in biology, microbiology, chemistry, anatomy and physiology




Edited By






Anastasia Climan, RDN, CD-N
Editor


Email








20 Cited Research Articles

Drugwatch.com writers follow rigorous sourcing guidelines and cite only trustworthy sources of information, including peer-reviewed journals, court records, academic organizations, highly regarded nonprofit organizations, government reports and interviews with qualified experts. Review our editorial policy to learn more about our process for producing accurate, current and balanced content.



View Sources



Cancer Treatment Centers of America. (2022, June 13). Does talcum powder cause cancer? Retrieved from https://www.cancercenter.com/risk-factors/talcum-powder  
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (2022, January 13). Talc. Retrieved from https://www.fda.gov/cosmetics/cosmetic-ingredients/talc  
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (2022, January 13). FDA Releases White Paper on Testing Methods for Asbestos in Cosmetic Products Containing Talc. Retrieved from https://www.fda.gov/food/cfsan-constituent-updates/fda-releases-white-paper-testing-methods-asbestos-cosmetic-products-containing-talc  
Stoiber, T. (2020, November 25). EWG-Commissioned Tests Finds Cancer-Causing Asbestos in Talc-based Cosmetics. Retrieved from https://www.ewg.org/news-insights/news/ewg-commissioned-tests-finds-cancer-causing-asbestos-talc-based-cosmetics  
American Cancer Society. (2020, February 4). Talcum Powder and Cancer. Retrieved from https://www.cancer.org/healthy/cancer-causes/chemicals/talcum-powder-and-cancer.html  
U.S. National Library of Medicine. (2018, August 14). Face powder poisoning. Retrieved from https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/002700.htm 
U.S. National Library of Medicine. (2018, August 14). Talcum powder poisoning. Retrieved from https://medlineplus.gov/ency/article/002719.htm 
U.S. National Library of Medicine. (2018, June). Household Products Database. Retrieved from https://web.archive.org/web/20190708184432/https://hpd.nlm.nih.gov/cgi-bin/household/brands?tbl=chem&id=9 
U.S. PIRG. (2018, March 13). Asbestos Found in Claire’s Kids Makeup. Retrieved from https://uspirg.org/news/usf/asbestos-found-claire%E2%80%99s-kids-makeup 
Gowda, D. & Cook-Schultz, K. (2018, March). In Your Face: Makeup Contaminated With Asbestos. Retrieved from https://calpirg.org/sites/pirg/files/reports/CalPIRG%20Asbestos%20Claires%20Makeup%20Report.pdf 
Verlynde, G., Agneessens, E. & Dargent, J. (2018, January 31). Pulmonary Talcosis Due to Daily Inhalation of Talc Powder. Retrieved from https://www.jbsr.be/articles/10.5334/jbsr.1384/ 
Spiller, H. (2017, December 28). Asbestos in Children’s Makeup: What’s the Risk to Your Child? Retrieved from https://www.nationwidechildrens.org/family-resources-education/700childrens/2017/12/asbestos-in-childrens-makeup-whats-the-risk-to-your-child 
Breast Cancer Fund. (2016, October). Pretty Scary 2: Unmasking Toxic Chemicals in Kids’ Makeup. Retrieved from https://www.safecosmetics.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/Pretty-Scary_2016.pdf 
Thanh-Phuong, N. et al. (2016). Pulmonary Talcosis in an Immunocompromised Patient. Retrieved from https://www.hindawi.com/journals/crim/2016/4678637/ 
Fiume, M. et al. (2015, July 20). Safety Assessment of Talc as Used in Cosmetics. Retrieved from https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/1091581815586797 
Fiume, M.M. et al. (2015, July). Safety Assessment of Talc as Used in Cosmetics. Retrieved from https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26227892/ 
Schneider, A. (2014, October 31). Study: Cosmetic talc products carry asbestos peril. Retrieved from https://www.seattlepi.com/national/article/Study-Cosmetic-talc-products-carry-asbestos-peril-5861858.php 
International Labour Organization. (2014, July 1). Talc (Silica and Fibre Free). Retrieved from https://www.ilo.org/dyn/icsc/showcard.display?p_lang=en&p_card_id=0329&p_version=1 
Mount Sinai Hospital. (n.d.). Face powder poisoning. Retrieved from https://www.mountsinai.org/health-library/poison/face-powder-poisoning  
United States Department of Labor. (n.d.). Asbestos. Retrieved from https://www.osha.gov/asbestos


















On This Page


Overview


Asbestos Contamination


Links to Cancer







Cancer after talcum powder exposure?

                    Call now for a free case review



                        Who Am I Calling?
                    


Call Now


Close






Who Am I Calling?




Calling this number connects you with a Drugwatch representative. We will direct you to one of our trusted legal partners for a free case review.
Drugwatch's trusted legal partners support the organization's mission to keep people safe from dangerous drugs and medical devices. For more information, visit our partners page.
(855) 547-5876










Subscribe to Our Newsletter
Join our newsletter to stay up to date on dangerous drugs and devices, keep up on lawsuit and settlement news, learn about FDA recalls, and more.


Sign Up NowConnect with Drugwatch on Twitter










Navigate



FAQ


Lawsuits


FDA


News


Drugs


Health Info


Devices


Drugwatch Podcast


Side Effects


Beyond Side Effects





Drugwatch.com
Keep people safe from potentially harmful drugs, medical devices and procedures by informing them of medical conditions, severe side effects and ways to take action.
More About Us





(855) 547-5876




Who Am I Calling?




Connect with Drugwatch on Facebook



Connect with Drugwatch on Twitter



Connect with Drugwatch on Youtube



Contact Drugwatch by Email


















































            Drugwatch is located at: 
1 South Orange Ave, Suite 201, Orlando, FL 32801



The information on this website is proprietary and protected. It is not a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. Any unauthorized or illegal use, copying or dissemination will be prosecuted. Please read our disclaimer for more information about our website.
Drugwatch.com partners with law firms. This website and its content may be deemed attorney advertising. Prior results do not predict a similar outcome. For more information, visit our partners page.
© 2023 Drugwatch.com Privacy Policy / Advertising Disclosure / 


Do Not Sell My Info

 California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) Inquiries

 

Drugwatch.com doesn’t believe in selling customer information. However, as required by the new California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA), you may record your preference to view or remove your personal information by completing the form below.


Sorry there was an error. Please wait a moment and try again.
Sorry there is a continuing error in our system. Please call us using the phone number listed on this page. 



Request Type

Please select a type:Information RequestData Deletion


Full Name



Full Name



Phone Number



Email



Street Address



Zip Code





Submit









 Your web browser is no longer supported by Microsoft. Update your browser for more security, speed and compatibility.
If you would like to speak with a Drugwatch representative, please call 888-645-1617






















































