Document Name: role of Mineral Oil in Eye Cream2
Document link: https://healthy.kaiserpermanente.org/health-wellness/drug-encyclopedia/drug.white-petrolatum-mineral-oil-94-3-eye-ointment.555723









white petrolatum-mineral oil 94 %-3 % eye ointment  | Kaiser Permanente















































 















Region


Choose your region


















Language



















Sign In
                or
                          
                Register















My Account





















KP Logo










Search





Sign in


Navigation Menu - Opens a Simulated Dialog
            



Menu















Kaiser Permanente logo










                  Close Navigation Menu
                













My Account





                        Profile & Preferences
                    



                        My Documents
                    




                    Sign out
                











Language


















                            My Health
                        



                            Benefits
                        



                            Medical Record
                        



                            Message Center
                        



                            Appointments
                        



                            Pharmacy
                        



                            Billing
                        



                            Health & Wellness
                        












                            Learn
                        



                            Shop Plans
                        



                            Doctors & Locations
                        



                            Health & Wellness
                        



                            Get Care
                        



                            Pay Bills
                        














                Sign in
            


New Member? Register







Region


Choose your region


















Language

















Search















Close
    



Search











Search
            






















Visit Health & wellness
                                




Drug encyclopedia










Print







white petrolatum-mineral oil 94 %-3 % eye ointment




Loading...



View more photos

The photos shown are samples only
			





Not all photos of the drug may be displayed. Your medication may look different. If you have questions, ask your pharmacist.


close popup






9213
Medication name

Generic name:Eye lubricant - ophthalmic

Uses

This medication is used to relieve dry, irritated eyes. Common causes for dry eyes include wind, sun, heating/air conditioning, computer use/reading, and certain medications.
This product may contain 1 or more of the following ingredients: carboxymethylcellulose, dextran, glycerin, hypromellose, polyethylene glycol 400 (PEG 400), polysorbate, polyvinyl alcohol, povidone, or propylene glycol, among others.
Eye lubricants keep the eye moist, help to protect the eye from injury and infection, and decrease symptoms of dry eyes such as burning, itching, and feeling as if something is in the eye.

How to use

Follow all directions on the product package. If you have any questions, ask your doctor or pharmacist. Do not use a solution that has changed color or is cloudy. Certain brands (containing glycerin with polysorbates, among other ingredients) may have a milky appearance. This is okay as long as the solution does not change color. Some eye drops need to be shaken before use. Check the label to see if you should shake your product before using.
Usually, drops may be used as often as needed. Ointments are usually used 1 to 2 times daily as needed. If using an ointment once a day, it may be best to use it at bedtime.
To apply eye ointment/drops/gels: Wash hands first. To avoid contamination, be careful not to touch the dropper or top of the ointment tube or let it touch your eye. Always replace the cap tightly after each use. Tilt your head back, look up, and pull down the lower eyelid to make a pouch. For drops/gels, place the dropper directly over the eye and squeeze out 1 or 2 drops as needed. Look down and gently close your eye for 1 or 2 minutes. Place one finger at the corner of the eye near the nose and apply gentle pressure. This will prevent the medication from draining away from the eye. For an ointment, hold the tube directly over the eye and gently squeeze a small strip (one-fourth of an inch or roughly 6 millimeters) of ointment into the pouch. Release the eyelid, close the eye, and slowly roll your eye in all directions to spread the medication. Blot away any extra ointment from around the eye with a clean tissue.
If you are also using another kind of eye medication (such as drops or ointments), wait at least 5 minutes before applying other medications. Use eye drops before eye ointments to allow the eye drops to enter the eye.
If you wear contact lenses, remove them before using most kinds of eye lubricants. Ask your doctor or pharmacist when you may replace your contact lenses. There are a few types of eye lubricants (some that contain polysorbates) that can be used while wearing contact lenses. Check the package to see if you can wear your contact lenses while using your product.
Tell your doctor if your condition lasts or gets worse after 3 days.

Side effects

Vision may be temporarily blurred when this product is first used. Also, minor burning/stinging/irritation may temporarily occur. If any of these effects last or get worse, tell your doctor or pharmacist promptly.
If your doctor has directed you to use this medication, remember that your doctor has judged that the benefit to you is greater than the risk of side effects. Many people using this medication do not have serious side effects.
Tell your doctor right away if you have any serious side effects, including:

eye pain
change in vision
continued eye redness/irritation

A very serious allergic reaction to this drug is rare. However, get medical help right away if you notice any symptoms of a serious allergic reaction, including:

rash
itching/swelling (especially of the face/tongue/throat)
severe dizziness
trouble breathing

This is not a complete list of possible side effects. If you notice other effects not listed above, contact your doctor or pharmacist.
In the US -
Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report side effects to FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or at www.fda.gov/medwatch.
In Canada - Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report side effects to Health Canada at 1-866-234-2345.

Precautions

Before using this product, tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to it; or if you have any other allergies. This product may contain inactive ingredients, which can cause allergic reactions or other problems. Talk to your pharmacist for more details.
If you have any health problems, consult your doctor or pharmacist before using this product.
After you apply this product, your vision may become temporarily blurred. Do not drive, use machinery, or do any activity that requires clear vision until you can do it safely.

Drug interactions

Drug interactions may change how your medications work or increase your risk for serious side effects. This document does not contain all possible drug interactions. Keep a list of all the products you use (including prescription/nonprescription drugs and herbal products) and share it with your doctor and pharmacist. Do not start, stop, or change the dosage of any medicines without your doctor's approval.

Overdose

This medicine may be harmful if swallowed. If someone has overdosed and has serious symptoms such as passing out or trouble breathing, call 911. Otherwise, call a poison control center right away. US residents can call their local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. Canada residents can call a provincial poison control center.

Notes

Some products contain preservatives that may damage contact lenses or cause irritation in persons with allergies. For more information, check your product package or talk with your health care professional.

Missed dose

This medication is usually used only as needed.

Storage

Refer to storage information printed on the package. Protect ointments from freezing. Some preservative-free drops that come in single-use vials/droppers should be discarded either immediately after use or up to 12 hours after opening. Check your product package to see when you should discard your preservative-free product. If you have any questions about storage, ask your pharmacist. Keep all medications away from children and pets.
Do not flush medications down the toilet or pour them into a drain unless instructed to do so. Properly discard this product when it is expired or no longer needed. Consult your pharmacist or local waste disposal company.

Important note

HOW TO USE THIS INFORMATION: This is a summary and does NOT have all possible information about this product. This information does not assure that this product is safe, effective, or appropriate for you. This information is not individual medical advice and does not substitute for the advice of your health care professional. Always ask your health care professional for complete information about this product and your specific health needs.


Information last revised December 2022.
Copyright(c) 2023 First Databank, Inc.




 Selected from NATIONAL DRUG DATA FILE (NDDF) data included with permission and copyrighted by First Databank, Inc., 2019. This copyrighted material has been downloaded from a licensed data provider.
The above information is intended to supplement, not substitute for, the expertise and judgment of your health care professional. You should consult your health care professional before taking any drug, changing your diet, or commencing or discontinuing any course of treatment.







RESOURCES


Check which drugs your plan covers


Refill prescriptions online


Search for vitamins and natural medicines





SHARE THIS ARTICLE
























 






















One moment
Switching to {{aocRegion}}















				Find care
			






Get Care


Find Doctors & Locations


Health Classes


Care When Traveling


Timely Access to Care













				Our organization
			






About KP


Patient Quality & Safety


News


Commitment to the Community


Equity, Inclusion, & Diversity


Annual Report


Careers


For the Media













				Member support
			






New Member Welcome


Forms & Publications


Support Center


Medical Information Requests


Request for confidential communications forms













				Visit our other sites
			






Individual & Family Plans


Medicaid/Medi-Cal


Medicare


Affordable Care Act


For Businesses


For Federal Employees


Broker Support

























Accessibility


Nondiscrimination Notice


Website Privacy






HIPAA Notice of Privacy Practices


Terms & Conditions


Rights & Responsibilities






Disaster Planning


Technical Information


Site Map






Contact Site Manager


HIPAA Authorization










Accessibility


Nondiscrimination Notice


Website Privacy


HIPAA Notice of Privacy Practices




Terms & Conditions


Rights & Responsibilities


Disaster Planning


Technical Information




Site Map


Contact Site Manager


HIPAA Authorization







Follow us on these external social media sites that will open in a new browser window.




































Kaiser Permanente health plans around the country: Kaiser Foundation Health Plan, Inc., in Northern and Southern California and Hawaii • Kaiser Foundation Health Plan of Colorado • Kaiser Foundation Health Plan of Georgia, Inc., Nine Piedmont Center, 3495 Piedmont Road NE, Atlanta, GA 30305, 404-364-7000 • Kaiser Foundation Health Plan of the Mid-Atlantic States, Inc., in Maryland, Virginia, and Washington, D.C., 2101 E. Jefferson St., Rockville, MD 20852 • Kaiser Foundation Health Plan of the Northwest, 500 NE Multnomah St., Suite 100, Portland, OR 97232 • Kaiser Foundation Health Plan of Washington or Kaiser Foundation Health Plan of Washington Options, Inc., 1300 SW 27th St., Renton, WA 98057





 Selecting these links   will take you away from KP.org. Kaiser Permanente is not responsible for the content or policies of external websites. Learn more about link terms and conditions




Adobe Acrobat is required to read PDFs.




© 2023 Kaiser Foundation Health Plan, Inc.




















            Drug Encyclopedia
        






















            Importante
        







No volver a mostrar esto.


Continuar

Cancelar

















            Want to stay signed on?
        






Sign Off
Stay signed on
















            We are unable to switch you to this area of care
        







Close




















            We’re getting your information
        







Close
















