Document Name: role of Mineral oil in Foundation Cream4
Document link: https://healthy.kaiserpermanente.org/health-wellness/drug-encyclopedia/drug.lanolin-alcohols-mineral-oil-w-petrolatum-ceresin-topical-cream.556135









lanolin alcohols-mineral oil-w.petrolatum-ceresin topical cream  | Kaiser Permanente















































 















Region


Choose your region


















Language



















Sign In
                or
                          
                Register















My Account





















KP Logo










Search





Sign in


Navigation Menu - Opens a Simulated Dialog
            



Menu















Kaiser Permanente logo










                  Close Navigation Menu
                













My Account





                        Profile & Preferences
                    



                        My Documents
                    




                    Sign out
                











Language


















                            My Health
                        



                            Benefits
                        



                            Medical Record
                        



                            Message Center
                        



                            Appointments
                        



                            Pharmacy
                        



                            Billing
                        



                            Health & Wellness
                        












                            Learn
                        



                            Shop Plans
                        



                            Doctors & Locations
                        



                            Health & Wellness
                        



                            Get Care
                        



                            Pay Bills
                        














                Sign in
            


New Member? Register







Region


Choose your region


















Language

















Search















Close
    



Search











Search
            






















Visit Health & wellness
                                




Drug encyclopedia










Print







lanolin alcohols-mineral oil-w.petrolatum-ceresin topical cream




Loading...



View more photos

The photos shown are samples only
			





Not all photos of the drug may be displayed. Your medication may look different. If you have questions, ask your pharmacist.


close popup






0164
Medication name

Generic name:Emollients - topical

Uses

This medication is used as a moisturizer to treat or prevent dry, rough, scaly, itchy skin and minor skin irritations (such as diaper rash, skin burns from radiation therapy). Emollients are substances that soften and moisturize the skin and decrease itching and flaking. Some products (such as zinc oxide, white petrolatum) are used mostly to protect the skin against irritation (such as from wetness).
Dry skin is caused by a loss of water in the upper layer of the skin. Emollients/moisturizers work by forming an oily layer on the top of the skin that traps water in the skin. Petrolatum, lanolin, mineral oil and dimethicone are common emollients. Humectants, including glycerin, lecithin, and propylene glycol, draw water into the outer layer of skin. Many products also have ingredients that soften the horny substance (keratin) that holds the top layer of skin cells together (including urea, alpha hydroxy acids such as lactic/citric/glycolic acid, and allantoin). This helps the dead skin cells fall off, helps the skin keep in more water, and leaves the skin feeling smoother and softer.

How to use

Use this product as directed. Some products require priming before use. Follow all directions on the product package. If you have any questions, ask your doctor or pharmacist.
Some products need to be shaken before use. Check the label to see if you should shake the bottle well before using. Apply to the affected areas of the skin as needed or as directed on the label or by your doctor. How often you apply the medication will depend on the product and your skin condition. To treat dry hands, you may need to use the product every time you wash your hands, applying it throughout the day.
If you are using this product to help treat diaper rash, clean the diaper area well before use and allow the area to dry before applying the product.
If you are using this product to help treat radiation skin burns, check with radiation personnel to see if your brand can be applied before radiation therapy.
Follow all the directions on the label for proper use. Apply to the skin only. Avoid sensitive areas such as your eyes, inside your mouth/nose, and the vaginal/groin area, unless the label or your doctor directs you otherwise. Check the label for directions about any areas or types of skin where you should not apply the product (such as on the face, any areas of broken/chapped/cut/irritated/scraped skin, or on a recently shaved area of the skin). Consult your doctor or pharmacist for more details.
Use this medication regularly to get the most benefit from it. Most moisturizers need water to work well. Apply the product after bathing/showering while the skin is still damp. For very dry skin, your doctor may instruct you to soak the area before using the product. Long, hot, or frequent bathing/washing can worsen dry skin.
If your condition lasts or gets worse, or if you think you may have a serious medical problem, get medical help right away.

Side effects

Most emollients can be used safely and effectively with no side effects. However, burning, stinging, redness, or irritation may occur. If any of these effects last or get worse, tell your doctor or pharmacist promptly.
If your doctor has prescribed this medication, remember that your doctor has judged that the benefit to you is greater than the risk of side effects. Many people using this medication do not have serious side effects.
Tell your doctor right away if you have any serious side effects, including:

unusual changes in the skin (such as turning white/soft/soggy from too much wetness)
signs of skin infection

A very serious allergic reaction to this drug is rare. However, get medical help right away if you notice any symptoms of a serious allergic reaction, including:

rash
itching/swelling (especially of the face/tongue/throat)
severe dizziness
trouble breathing

This is not a complete list of possible side effects. If you notice other effects not listed above, contact your doctor or pharmacist.
In the US -
Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report side effects to FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or at www.fda.gov/medwatch.
In Canada - Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report side effects to Health Canada at 1-866-234-2345.

Precautions

Before using this product, tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to any of the ingredients in the product; or if you have any other allergies. This product may contain inactive ingredients, which can cause allergic reactions or other problems. Talk to your pharmacist for more details.
If you have any of the following health problems, consult your doctor or pharmacist before using this product:

skin cuts/infections/sores

Some ingredients (such as preservatives, fragrance) may make you more sensitive to the sun. Check the label for any warnings or ask your doctor or pharmacist if you need to take any special precautions when in the sun. Your doctor/pharmacist may suggest that you limit your time in the sun, avoid tanning booths and sunlamps, and use sunscreen and wear protective clothing when outdoors. Tell your doctor right away if you get sunburned or have skin blisters/redness.
Some products may worsen acne. If your skin is prone to acne breakouts, look for the word "non-comedogenic" (will not clog pores) on the label. Some products may stain/discolor clothing. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for more details.
Before having surgery, tell your doctor or dentist about all the products you use (including prescription drugs, nonprescription drugs, and herbal products).
Tell your doctor if you are pregnant before using this product.
It is unknown if this product passes into breast milk. Consult your doctor before breast-feeding, especially if you are applying this product to the breast area.

Drug interactions

Drug interactions may change how your medications work or increase your risk for serious side effects. This document does not contain all possible drug interactions. Keep a list of all the products you use (including prescription/nonprescription drugs and herbal products) and share it with your doctor and pharmacist. Do not start, stop, or change the dosage of any medicines without your doctor's approval.

Overdose

This medicine may be harmful if swallowed. If someone has overdosed and has serious symptoms such as passing out or trouble breathing, call 911. Otherwise, call a poison control center right away. US residents can call their local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. Canada residents can call a provincial poison control center.

Notes

Some ways to help prevent dry skin include using lukewarm (not hot) water when bathing, taking baths/showers less often (such as every 1-2 days), keeping baths/showers short, and using a humidifier when the air is very dry.
There are many types of emollient products available. Some contain fragrance or other ingredients that some people may be sensitive to. Emollients are available in different forms such as oils, creams, lotions, or sprays. Consult with your doctor or pharmacist on the product that may be best for you.

Missed dose

If you are using this product on a regular schedule and miss a dose, use it as soon as you remember. Do not use more product or use it more often than directed to catch up.

Storage

Refer to storage information printed on the package. If you have any questions about storage, ask your pharmacist. Keep all medications away from children and pets.
Do not store the foam canister near high heat, and do not store or use it near an open flame. Because foam canisters are under pressure, do not puncture or burn the canister.
Do not flush medications down the toilet or pour them into a drain unless instructed to do so. Properly discard this product when it is expired or no longer needed. Consult your pharmacist or local waste disposal company.

Important note

HOW TO USE THIS INFORMATION: This is a summary and does NOT have all possible information about this product. This information does not assure that this product is safe, effective, or appropriate for you. This information is not individual medical advice and does not substitute for the advice of your health care professional. Always ask your health care professional for complete information about this product and your specific health needs.


Information last revised March 2023.
Copyright(c) 2023 First Databank, Inc.




 Selected from NATIONAL DRUG DATA FILE (NDDF) data included with permission and copyrighted by First Databank, Inc., 2019. This copyrighted material has been downloaded from a licensed data provider.
The above information is intended to supplement, not substitute for, the expertise and judgment of your health care professional. You should consult your health care professional before taking any drug, changing your diet, or commencing or discontinuing any course of treatment.







RESOURCES


Check which drugs your plan covers


Refill prescriptions online


Search for vitamins and natural medicines





SHARE THIS ARTICLE
























 






















One moment
Switching to {{aocRegion}}















				Find care
			






Get Care


Find Doctors & Locations


Health Classes


Care When Traveling


Timely Access to Care













				Our organization
			






About KP


Patient Quality & Safety


News


Commitment to the Community


Equity, Inclusion, & Diversity


Annual Report


Careers


For the Media













				Member support
			






New Member Welcome


Forms & Publications


Support Center


Medical Information Requests


Request for confidential communications forms













				Visit our other sites
			






Individual & Family Plans


Medicaid/Medi-Cal


Medicare


Affordable Care Act


For Businesses


For Federal Employees


Broker Support

























Accessibility


Nondiscrimination Notice


Website Privacy






HIPAA Notice of Privacy Practices


Terms & Conditions


Rights & Responsibilities






Disaster Planning


Technical Information


Site Map






Contact Site Manager


HIPAA Authorization










Accessibility


Nondiscrimination Notice


Website Privacy


HIPAA Notice of Privacy Practices




Terms & Conditions


Rights & Responsibilities


Disaster Planning


Technical Information




Site Map


Contact Site Manager


HIPAA Authorization







Follow us on these external social media sites that will open in a new browser window.




































Kaiser Permanente health plans around the country: Kaiser Foundation Health Plan, Inc., in Northern and Southern California and Hawaii • Kaiser Foundation Health Plan of Colorado • Kaiser Foundation Health Plan of Georgia, Inc., Nine Piedmont Center, 3495 Piedmont Road NE, Atlanta, GA 30305, 404-364-7000 • Kaiser Foundation Health Plan of the Mid-Atlantic States, Inc., in Maryland, Virginia, and Washington, D.C., 2101 E. Jefferson St., Rockville, MD 20852 • Kaiser Foundation Health Plan of the Northwest, 500 NE Multnomah St., Suite 100, Portland, OR 97232 • Kaiser Foundation Health Plan of Washington or Kaiser Foundation Health Plan of Washington Options, Inc., 1300 SW 27th St., Renton, WA 98057





 Selecting these links   will take you away from KP.org. Kaiser Permanente is not responsible for the content or policies of external websites. Learn more about link terms and conditions




Adobe Acrobat is required to read PDFs.




© 2023 Kaiser Foundation Health Plan, Inc.




















            Drug Encyclopedia
        






















            Importante
        







No volver a mostrar esto.


Continuar

Cancelar

















            Want to stay signed on?
        






Sign Off
Stay signed on
















            We are unable to switch you to this area of care
        







Close




















            We’re getting your information
        







Close
















