Document Name: role of Propylene Glycol in Massage Cream2
Document link: https://www.gotyourback.com/sacred-earth-vegan-massage-cream.aspx




	Sacred Earth Vegan Massage Cream










































customer service  610-834-3992
Item(s): 0 Total: $0.00



 
















Welcome Guest, Sign in or register

home
about us
customer service
contact us



Massage & Spa Equipment

Portable Massage Tables
Massage Chairs
Stationary Massage Tables
Electric Massage Tables
Table Accessories
Massage Bolsters
Breast Comfort and Body Positioning Systems
Stools & Table Carts

Oils, Creams & Lotions

Aromatherapy
Shop by Brand
Massage Oils
Massage Gels
Massage Lotions
Massage Cremes
Biofreeze & Cryotherapy
Organic & Natural Massage
Holsters, Bottles & Pumps

Massage Supplies

Massage Linens
Disposable Face Covers
Fleece Pads, Table Warmers & Blankets
Hot and Cold Therapy
Massage Tools
Charts

Treatment Supplies

Body Treatments
Facial Treatments
Hot Stone Massage
Mu-Xing Bamboo Therapy

MASSAGE CLASSES

Live Massage Classes
PA Massage License Information

Clinic





Home > Massage Oils, Creams and Lotions > Sacred Earth Botanicals > Sacred Earth Vegan Massage Cream






Sacred Earth Vegan Massage Cream







 See Reviews 

Price: From $19.95 to $438.00


Manufacturer: Sacred Earth


Product Options


Size:


											Select Size
										
											8 oz. Refillable Tube
										
											64 oz. Tub
										
											128 oz. Tub
										
											2 Gallon ($94.95 ea)
										
											Case - 4 Gallons ($91.95 ea)
										
											5 Gallon Tub
										



 

Quantity:* Whole number only

















SacredEarth Botanicals' unscented massage cream is thick, rich and concentrated so a small amount will offer several minutes of workability. Our cream was formulated to provide great grip for controlled strokes and deep tissue work, yet offer the glide of oil making it an excellent choice for a full body massage as well. Rich in essential fatty acids and organic botanical extracts for a calming, therapeutic experience for the client. Unscented, hypo-allergenic and vegan, our massage cream will please even the most discriminating clients.
Vegan massage cream has none of the following ingredients:
No Parabens, Animal Products, Dimethicone, Propylene Glycol, TEA (Triethanolamine) or Ureas
Vegan Ingredients simplified:
Organic Sunflower Oil - rich in essential fatty acids and vitamin E to aid  skin hydration Octyl Palmitate - from palm oil, adds glide Vegetable Glycerin - humectant Organic Aloe barbadensis Leaf Juice - skin moisturizer  Organic Lavender Extract - relaxing ingredient Organic Arnica Extract - calming ingredient  Organic White Tea Extract - antioxidant  Organic Chamomile Extract - soothing ingredient  Tocopherols (Vitamin E) - antioxidant Sodium Carbomer - thickening agent  Phenoxyethanol - rose essence preservative  Ethyl Hexyl Glycerin - vegetable based preservative.





Product Reviews




		
			Rate This Product:  or Create a Review








(47 Ratings, 3 Reviews)

Average Rating: 











Massage cream Superior to all

CHRISTOPHER SOVEREIGN
(Palm Desert, CA)
12/26/2021 5:14 PM

Sacred Earth massage cream provides excellent glide that provides me the control I need- just right glide w/out being slick.  While it is non-greasy or oily for clients, it absorbs at the perfect speed for my medical massage/ trigger point/ specific work.  Superior for tool work additionally.  In my 38 years of massage, this is my all time fave.  I've been using it for at least 15 years now.  My hands are happy, so are my clients and their skin.  I recommend this cream without reservation and hope to continue using for the next 20 years.
   Christopher Sovereign LMT, CMT, CNMT, CTPI, CBAT, COSM, CRFit- Sovereign Advanced Massage; Palm Desert, CA






Best  I have found

susan Baatz
(Washington Crossing, PA)
9/7/2017 11:56 AM

I unfortunately suffer for dermatiti. and at the suggestion of the seller I tried this brand and I am happy to say that my hands and skin are happy and my clients are as well.  This has great glide, no scent and ingredients that can be irritating.  I highly recommend to any of yo out there that are having issue.






best in my 30 years of massage

Kate Murray
(Arlington, VA)
2/7/2016 10:08 AM

I've re-ordered this many times. I've been practicing since the 80s and in that time I've used Cayce oil formulas, fractionated or solid coconut oil, pecan oil, almond oil, and creams/lotions Soothing Touch and Biotone.  I first tried Sacred Earth when Soothing Touch changed their pump lotion formula and my clients and I immediately broke out in rashes, sad to say. I wanted something with little or no scent, a medium drag and staying power. This was perfect. I don't slide off the client but the glide stays longer than the Biotone formulas (I use a fairly firm stroke and do a good deal of deep tissue and crossfiber work). No one gets a skin irritation from it and people appreciate the absence of aroma. I've tried other creams as they reached the market and never found any I preferred.





















Join our mailing list to receive the latest offers, updates & promotions!







Email Address:








we respect your privacy




521 E. Hector Street
          
          
          
          Conshohocken, PA 19428
          
          
          610 834 3992
info@gotyourback.com


Order Hours

Showroom Hours:
          
          
          
          Monday - Friday 10am - 4:00pm
          
          
          
          Saturday By Appointment Only



Navigation

Home
About Us
Customer Service
Site Map



Showroom

Our Showroom
Equipment Rental
Class Policies
Blog















© 2014-2023 GotYourBack.com. All Rights Reserved. eCommerce Store Design by Solid Cactus












