Document Name: role of Preservative in Protective Cream3
Document link: https://www.obenaufs.com/heavy-duty-lp-p/leather-preservative-paste.htm











Leather Preservative Originally Developed for Wild-land Firefighters

















































Skip to content

      To take full advantage of this site, please enable your browser's JavaScript feature. Learn how





























 

Obenaufs Your Best Leather Protection



Toggle Search



 




Account





Checkout



 

Cart





 








Products

Heavy Duty LP
Leather Oil
Water Shield
Economical Packages
Boot Laces
Leather Cleaner
Instant Shine
Brush


Leather Care

Why Choose Obenauf's?
3 Step Process
Quick Tips for Leather Care
Facts, Problems and Solutions
How To Apply


Applications

Leather Work Boots
Leather Garments
Leather Furniture
Horse and Tack
Firefighter Leather
Obenauf's on Wood


Testimonials

Article Reviews
Video Reviews & Guides


About Us

Obenauf's Story
Your Best Leather Protection
Contact Us


FAQ

Store Locator




 




Search site


Submit search




















Nav Menu 2





Nav Menu 3





Nav Menu 4





Nav Menu 5





Nav Menu 6





Nav Menu 7





Nav Menu 8





















  
Home  > 
 Products >  Heavy Duty LP > 

            

Heavy Duty LP













Heavy Duty LP Leather Preservative




 



















 
Alternative Views:






























 Starting Retail Price $11.95 Price with Selected Options: $0.00


Shipping Fee: Flat rate shipping fee of $9.00 will be applied to all domestic USA orders. Unlimited number of items allowed.


Product Code: LEATHER-PRESERVATIVE-PASTE 














































Heavy Duty LP






Jar Size and Price*:



4 ounce SKU: 0102 [Add $11.95]
8 ounce SKU: 0103 [Add $16.75]
128 ounce Gallon Bucket [Add $157.95]




                              Qty: 






                
                 






































                        Description
                











                  Technical Specs
                











                  Application
                









 
















Industrial Strength Leather Preservative


Provides Industrial Strength Protection to Work Boots
Made With Obenauf's Unique Beeswax/Propolis Suspension Formula
Beeswax Cream Melts When Applied By Hand & Buffs to a Shine
Originally Developed For Wild-land Firefighters Boots
Heavy Duty LP (Industrial Strength Leather Preservative) is Proudly Made in Idaho


What Is Heavy Duty LP?An industrial strength leather preservative paste best used for conditioning full grain leather, top grain, and nubuck. Made with natural oils, beeswax, and propolis to create a smooth cream/paste that melts when applied by hand. The beeswax, in our leather preservative, provides a protective barrier on the outside, while the natural oils are absorbed into the leather. A true leather preservative and conditioner, Heavy Duty LP restores lost oils, provides protection from moisture and dirt while still allowing leather to breathe.

Benefits of using Heavy Duty LP:


Repels water, acids, petroleum, salt, and chemicals
Restores dried & sun-faded leather
Resists scuffing, abrasion, stitch tear, and premature cracking in flex areas
Odorless after applied (will not spook game)
Contains no harmful petroleum, solvents, paraffin, or mink oil

A Leather Preservative Paste Designed to Protect Work Boots



	Our Heavy Duty LP provides industrial strength protection to keep work boots looking like new as long as possible. Applying leather preservative on a regular basis can double the life of most leather work boots used in extreme conditions such as, welding, farming, hunting, hiking, biking, horseback riding, inside factories, and outdoor workers like, lineman, trail builders, firefighters, ranchers, etc.






Don't need to preserve leather boots? Heavy Duty LP resists water, preserves, restores, and conditions leather shoes, belts, holsters, sheathes, saddle bags, tool pouches, and athletic gear. Not just a leather preservative, apply Heavy Duty to clean, warm, cotton oilskin dusters and hats to re-waterproof.



Leather Preservative Originally Developed for Wild-land Firefighters



	Originally developed for severe working conditions of Wild-land Firefighters to preserve leather boots and provide heavy duty protection, naturally! Wild-land Firefighters boots are subjected to heat, steam, wet ashes, and fire retardants. If left untreated (without leather preservative), these conditions can ruin expensive boots faster. Obenauf's® Heavy Duty leather preservative paste provides a beeswax barrier to resist heat, chemicals, and moisture while replacing lost oils.
	







For tips on applying leather preservative, see the instruction videos below provided by Leather Crafter, Woodlander North.









 How Much Leather Preservative Should I Apply? 







 What If I Put Too Much Heavy Duty LP On? 







 What Is The Best Method For Applying Heavy Duty LP? 







 How Often Should I Reapply? 










SKU


UPC


OUNCES


GROSS WEIGHT


DIMENSIONS L x W x H






			0102
		

		610372010202
		

		4
		

		5 ounces
		

		2 1/2 inches wide, 2 1/4 inches tall
		



		0103
		

		610372010301
		

		8
		

		9 ounces
		

		3 1/4 inches wide, 2 1/2 inches tall
		



		0107
		

		n/a
		

		128
		
9 lbs.

		8 inches wide, 7 1/4 inches tall
		






Applying Heavy Duty LP To Work Boots
Test leather preservative in a hidden area if color change is a concern1 ounce should provide 1 application to tall bootsApply every 6 to 8 weeks by hand (hand application melts leather preservative aiding in absorption and even coverage)Apply leather preservative at room temperature to clean, dry bootsAllow 1 hour between treatments and buff off excessTwo applications last much longer in wet conditionsFor more information on applying leather preservative, click here to read frequently asked questions.































Features

Unique Formula of Heavy Duty LP


An Idaho Wild-land Firefighter developed this unique Beeswax/Propolis* Suspension Formula to protect leather against caustic fire retardant chemicals, heat, water, and abrasion. Natural oils are suspended in beeswax and propolis creating a smooth, leather preservative cream. On the leather, these oils gradually seep out of the Beeswax/Propolis Suspension Formula. When exposed to heat or flexing the oils are released faster, so leather gets oiled when and where it needs it most, instead of parched and cracked. This Beeswax/Propolis Suspension Formula provides a time release lubrication to inner fibers, reinforcing the surface against scuffing and abrasions, while still allowing leather to breathe.


*Propolis is an antibacterial tree resin that resists bacteria and mold. It is a barrier against body acids, salt, and caustic chemicals. Combined with beeswax it will resist water better and longer.




















Average Rating:


5 of 5
                    


Total Reviews: 59

Write a review »











 

		    0 of 0 people found the following review helpful:
		  




 














 
April 15, 2023


Reviewer: 
                         James Barber from Grove City, OH United States

                        
 




                  Was this review helpful to you? 















 

		    0 of 0 people found the following review helpful:
		  




 













 
                     
                        Great 
April 14, 2023


Reviewer: 
                         Sam from Bloomington, MN United States

                        
 


                  Simple, straightforward, easy to use, great.

                  Was this review helpful to you? 















 

		    0 of 0 people found the following review helpful:
		  




 













 
                     
                        Great product, amazing customer service! 
April 13, 2023


Reviewer: 
                         Anonymous Person from MINNEAPOLIS, MN United States

                        
 


                  This leather conditioner is fantastic on my leather bike saddles.  Can't wait to try it on my boots!

                  Was this review helpful to you? 















 

		    0 of 0 people found the following review helpful:
		  




 













 
                     
                        Great Product and Fast Shipping! 
April 13, 2023


Reviewer: 
                         Antonio Davila from Twin Falls, ID United States

                        
 


                  I can't say enough about this product. I've used their leather conditioners for years and will not buy anything else. I manage my own small leather business and will only use Obenauf's. When going through them directly (which is the best way to get orders) they are way fast with the turnaround. Will be a customer for life!

                  Was this review helpful to you? 















 

		    1 of 1 people found the following review helpful:
		  




 













 
                     
                        Fantastic Product 
April 13, 2023


Reviewer: 
                         Gunnar Culp from Spokane, WA United States

                        
 


                  Will never purchase oil or protector from another brand. They shipped about 45 minutes after I placed the order online and the product shipped in one day. The LP itself is just excellent. Goes on evenly and leaves boots soft and water resistant. If you're alright with a little bit of darkening there is simply no better product.

                  Was this review helpful to you? 
















View 
      All Customer Reviews





11.9516.75157.95

 

 
 




FOLLOW ALONG ON INSTAGRAM | @OBENAUFS_LP
Join us on Instagram for our latest posts about leather care and outdoor adventures from our home in idaho #obenaufs #obenaufslp








Quick Links



My Account


Login/Register


Order Status


Help/FAQ


Shipping Information


Return Policy


Contact Us


Dealer Inquiry



 



Cookie Policy


Privacy Policy


Product Index


Category List


SDS


Terms of Service



 



MAILING LIST SIGN-UP





                                                            Enter your email address to join our newsletter
                                                        



Subscribe
                                                                GO
                                                            




 






Like Obenauf's Leather Care on Facebook





Subscribe to Obenauf's Leather Care's YouTube Channel





Pin Obenauf's Leather Care to Pinterest





Follow Obenauf's Leather Care on Instagram













                                                Contact Us
                                            

                                                Obenauf's Inc.
                                                72 Frontage Road
                                                Grangeville, Idaho 83530 USA
support@obenaufs.com



     











                                                © Copyright  2022 Obenauf's Leather Care
                                            


                                            All Rights Reserved.
                                            Ecommerce Software by Volusion
                                            











 



View our SSL











 





Back to top
















