Document Name: role of Cutina KD-16 in Eye Cream4
Document link: https://kidshealth.org/en/parents/bleeding.html
















































Dealing With Cuts  (for Parents) - Nemours KidsHealth






[Skip to Content]
 





Find care at Nemours Children's HealthDoctorsLocations













For Parents




For Kids




For Teens





For Educators






Search


Menu












Close Menu





For Parents




For Kids




For Teens




For Educators






Back


Featured Topics
For Parents





General Health


Growth & Development


Infections


Diseases & Conditions


Pregnancy & Baby


Nutrition & Fitness


Emotions & Behavior


School & Family Life


First Aid & Safety


Doctors & Hospitals


Videos


Expert Answers (Q&A)







Helping Kids When They Worry
When kids worry, parents can provide calm support.
Here’s how






Parents Home
Sitio para padres








Back


Featured Topics
For Kids





How the Body Works


Puberty & Growing Up


Staying Healthy


Staying Safe


Dictionary


Health Problems


Illnesses & Injuries


Relax & Unwind


People, Places & Things That Help


Feelings


Expert Answers (Q&A)


Videos







How Can I Handle Stress?
There are ways to help yourself through stressful moments.
Find out how






Kids Home
Sitio para niños








Back


Featured Topics
For Teens





Body


Mind


Sexual Health


Food & Fitness


Diseases & Conditions


Infections


Drugs & Alcohol


School & Jobs


Sports


Expert Answers (Q&A)


Staying Safe


Videos







Getting Help for Depression
If you feel depressed or alone, talking to a parent is a good place to start.
Tips for talking






Teens Home
Sitio para adolescentes








Search KidsHealth library







 


English
Español





 








 





  KidsHealth
  Parents
  Dealing With Cuts




Dealing With Cuts


        en español: Cómo afrontar los cortes




        Reviewed by:  Melanie L. Pitone, MD


















Listen







Play


Stop



 

Volume


 


mp3


Settings


Close Player









Larger text size


Large text size


Regular text size






Print










Getting a cut from time to time is part of being a kid. Luckily, most cuts are small and can be cared for at home. But some cuts might need medical care.
What to Do:
Some cuts need care right away. Call 911 for cuts that:

have heavy bleeding (soaking through bandages) or are spurting blood
happened with a severe head or neck injury

Call your doctor or take your child for medical care if:

You can't stop the bleeding after 15-20 minutes of pressure (keep putting pressure on the cut until your child gets help).
Dirt, debris or something else is stuck in the wound.
The cut is on the child's face, ear, or neck.
The cut was caused by an animal or human bite, a burn, electrical injury, or puncture wound (like a nail).
The cut is more than half an inch long or appears to be deep. Large or deep wounds should be checked for nerve or tendon injury.
You think the cut needs stitches; for example, if the cut is gaping open or you can see yellow fat under the skin or red muscle.

If you have any doubt about whether stitches are needed, call your doctor. But don’t wait. If a cut needs stitches, medical glue, or another kind of repair, it must happen within 18–24 hours of when the cut happened.
Home Care for Small Cuts:

Rinse the wound thoroughly with water to clean out dirt and debris.
Wash the wound with a mild soap and rinse well. (For minor wounds, you don't need to use an antiseptic solution to prevent infection, and some can cause allergic skin reactions.)
Cover the wound with a sterile adhesive bandage or sterile gauze and adhesive tape.
If the bandage gets wet, remove it and apply a new one. After the wound forms a scab, a bandage isn't needed.
Check the wound daily.
Call your doctor if the wound is red, swollen, tender, warm, or draining pus.

For Bleeding From a Large or Deep Cut or Tear:

Rinse off the wound with water so you can see it clearly and check its size.
Place a piece of sterile gauze or a clean cloth over the entire wound. If available, wear clean latex or rubber gloves.
If you can, raise the bleeding body part above the level of the child's heart. Do not apply a tourniquet.
Using the palm of your hand on the gauze or cloth, apply steady, direct pressure to the wound for 5 minutes. (During the 5 minutes, do not stop to check the wound or remove blood clots that may form on the gauze.)
If blood soaks through the gauze, do not remove it. Apply another gauze pad on top and continue applying pressure.

Call your doctor or get immediate medical care for all large or cuts or tears, or if:

you can't stop the bleeding after 5 minutes of pressure, or if the wound begins bleeding again (continue applying pressure until help arrives)
you can't clean out dirt and debris thoroughly, or there's something else stuck in the wound
the wound is on the child's face or neck
the injury was caused by an animal or human bite, a burn, electrical injury, or puncture wound (e.g., a nail)
the cut is more than half an inch long or appears to be deep — large or deep wounds can result in nerve or tendon damage

If you have any doubt about whether stitches are needed, call your doctor.




Reviewed by:  Melanie L. Pitone, MD

Date reviewed: August 2022









More on this topic for:

Parents
Kids
Teens




 What to Do About Cuts 


 First-Aid Kit 


 Animal Bites and Scratches 


 Staph Infections 


 Childproofing and Preventing Household Accidents 






 Scars


 Scabs


 Stitches






 Cuts, Scratches, and Scrapes 


 Cellulitis 



View more





 








                    Share:
                    
                




                                Share to Facebook
                                
                            





                                Share to Twitter
                                
                            





                                Share to Pinterest
                                
                            






/content/kidshealth/misc/medicalcodes/parents/articles/bleeding







 About Us 

 Contact Us

 Partners

 Editorial Policy

 Permissions Guidelines

 Privacy Policy & Terms of Use

 Notice of Nondiscrimination








Note: All information on Nemours® KidsHealth® is for educational purposes only. For specific medical advice, diagnoses, and treatment, consult your doctor.
© 1995-2023. The Nemours Foundation. Nemours Children's Health® and KidsHealth® are registered trademarks of The Nemours Foundation. All rights reserved.
Images sourced by The Nemours Foundation and Getty Images.



 








 



