Document Name: role of Benzophenone 3 in Protective Cream1
Document link: https://incidecoder.com/ingredients/benzophenone-3






Benzophenone-3 (Explained + Products)




















































Products
Ingredients
Decode INCI
Login

Register







Login

Register





Products
Ingredients
Decode INCI



 


Follow us on our new Insta page »

















                        Benzophenone-3
                    
icky

Also-called-like-this:  Oxybenzone

What-it-does: 

sunscreen



Irritancy: 
 0



Comedogenicity: 
  0 






Official CosIng Information

All Functions: uv absorber, uv filter
                    CAS #: 131-57-7
                     | EC #: 205-031-5
                    Chemical/IUPAC Name: 2-Hydroxy-4-Methoxybenzophenone
                    Cosmetic Restrictions: VI/4
                    

Details





A chemical sunscreen agent that absorbs UVB and short UVA rays (280-350nm) with its peak protection at 288 nm. Unlike many other chemical sunscreens, it is highly stable but its UV absorbing abilities are weak so it always has to be combined with other sunscreen agents for proper protection. More often than not, it's used as a photostabilizer rather than a proper sunscreen agent as it can protect formulas nicely from UV damage.
Regarding safety, BP-3 is somewhat controversial. First, its molecules are small (228 Da) and very lipophilic (oil loving) and these properties result in very good absorption. The problem is that you want sunscreens on the top of your skin and not in your bloodstream, so for BP-3 this is a problem. In fact, it absorbs so well that 4 hours after application of a sunscreen product with BP-3, it can be detected in urine. 
Another concern of BP-3 is that it shows some estrogenic activity, though it's probably not relevant when applied topically to the skin. Estrogenic activity was confirmed only in-vitro (in test tubes) and when taken orally by lab animals, and not when used topically as you would normally. In fact, a 2004 follow-up study to examine the estrogenic effect of sunscreens when used topically on the whole body found that "the endogenous levels of reproductive hormones were unaffected" (even though BP-3 could be detected both in plasma and urine, so its absorption is no doubt too good).
If that was not enough, Wikipedia claims that BP-3 is nowadays the most common allergen found in sunscreens, and the always-trustworthy smartskincare writes that "[benzophenones] have been shown in some studies to promote the generation of potentially harmful free radicals".
On the up side, sunscreens are pretty well regulated in several parts of the world, and BP-3 is considered "safe as used" and is an allowed sunscreen agent everywhere. It can be used in concentrations of up to 10% in the EU and up to 6% in the US.
Overall, BP-3 is probably our least favorite sunscreen agent and we prefer sunscreens without it. However, if you find a formula that you love and contains BP-3, we do not think that you should throw it away. A sunscreen with BP-3 is definitely better than no sunscreen. 


[more]
[more]
[less]




Something incorrect or missing? Let us know!



Show me some proof




                            Janjua, Nadeem Rezaq, et al. "Systemic absorption of the sunscreens benzophenone-3, octyl-methoxycinnamate, and 3-(4-methyl-benzylidene) camphor after whole-body topical application and reproductive hormone levels in humans." Journal of Investigative Dermatology 123.1 (2004): 57-61.
                        

                            Schlumpf, Margret, et al. "In vitro and in vivo estrogenicity of UV screens." Environmental health perspectives 109.3 (2001): 239.
                        


[more]
[less]



Products with Benzophenone-3


Chapstick Active With SPF 30, Original Flavour
Dermaglós Protector Solar  Con FPS 50 Invisible En Spray Continuo
Episol Color FPS70
Solbar Fifty Water Resistant Sunscreen, Broad Spectrum SPF 50 Protection Cream
U veil U-veil Forte Cream-SPF 60
Urban Skin Rx Complexion Protection Moisturizer Spf30
Apex Sunblock-Oc 45 Oil Control Matte Gel
Aveeno Daily Moisturizing Lotion SPF 15
Beach Hut Face Ultra-Sensitive Hypoallergenic Sunscreen Spf65
Beach Hut Max 100++ SPF Unbelievably Light Lotion Sunscreen
Bio Active Sun Protection Extra Whitening+Vitamin-C Cream SPF 60
Carmex Classic Lip Balm Original Stick
Carmex Fresh Cherry SPF 15
Clinique Spf 50 Sunscreen Face Cream
Creme classique Safari SPF 40
Dermaquest Solar Moisturizer Spf 30
Elizabeth Arden Ceramide Plump Perfect Lift And Firm Eye Cream Spf15
Elizabeth Arden Eight Hour Cream Lip Protectant Stick
Elizabeth Arden Pro Triple Protection Factor Face And Body Broad Spectrum SPF 30 Sunscreen Lotion
Essentials Sun Block Protection & Moisture SPF 50
Ethicare remedies UV Med SPF Gel
Face Reality Daily Spf30 Lotion
Garnier Ombrelle Kids Sunscreen Lotion Wet N' Protect
Garnier Ombrelle Ultra Light Advanced Weightless Body Lotion Spf50+
Garnier Ombrelle Ultra-Fluid Lotion - SPF 60
Higher Education Skincare Make Out Ready Lip Balm
La Roche-Posay Anthelios Mist SPF 50 For Body
La Roche-Posay Anthelios Ultra-Fluid Lotion Spf 50 For Body
Levinia Crema Hidroactiva
Lise Watier Lift & Firm 3D Ultra Firming Rejuvenating Day Creme SPF 15
Marcelle Flawless Air Serum Foundation Spf 15
Marcelle Sheer Tint Moisturizer Spf 30
Mash Sunprotection Lotion SPF 45
Mecca Cosmetica To Save Face Superscreen Spf 50+
Neutrogena Healthy Defense Daily Moisturizer Spf 45
Neutrogena Moistureshine Lip Soother Lipgloss Spf20
Neutrogena Revitalizing Lip Balm
Neutrogena Revitalizing Lip Balm SPF 20
Neutrogena Ultra Sheer® Face Sunscreen (Spf 60)
Neutrogena Norwegian Formula Lip Moisturizer With Sunscreen Spf 15
Olay Total Effects 7-in-one Moisturizer With Sunscreen SPF 30
PLUM Grape Seed & Sea Buckthorn Light Stay Day Cream Spf 30
POLA Sun Active Defense
Palmer's Cocoa Butter Formula Ultra Moisturizing Lip Balm With Spf 15
Paula's Choice Extra Care Non-greasy Sunscreen SPF 50
Physicans formula Natural Defense Powder
SunSense Anti-Ageing Face
SunSense Daily Face Spf 50+
reversa Anti-Wrinkle Cream Spf 30
Algenist Repairing Tint And Radiance Moisturizer Broad Spectrum SPF 30

Next page >>









                        We do a Best of INCIDecoder email once a month with the most interesting products and ingredients we bump into.

                        
                            




An error has occurred. Please try again later!


Click below to subscribe:




        Thanks. :)  You are almost done: please check your mailbox to confirm your email!
    







                    *INCI is a list of the standardized and internationally accepted names used in the declaration of ingredients on cosmetic and personal care products. It is published by the Personal Care Product Council.
                

                    Copyright 2023 | About


 







