Document Name: role of CRODALAN AWS in Cover Cream2
Document link: https://www.drugs.com/sklice.html




Sklice: Side Effects, Dosage & Uses - Drugs.com





































Skip to main content










Search Drugs.com



Close
 




All
 

Select the section you want to search in

All
Consumer
Professional
Pill ID
Interactions
News and alerts
Care notes
Natural products




Search
 


				Browse all medications:
				
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
i
j
k
l
m
n
o
p
q
r
s
t
u
v
w
x
y
z
0-9

Advanced Search



Register
Sign In



Site navigation
  






Account

Sign in
Create an account


Drugs A-Z
Pill Identifier
Interactions Checker
News & Alerts
Pro Edition
More Resources





 
Close
 







Treatments
Head Lice
Sklice




 Print


 Save





Sklice





Generic name: ivermectin
Dosage form: lotion
Drug classes: Topical anti-infectives, Topical anti-rosacea agents
Medically reviewed by Judith Stewart, BPharm. Last updated on Oct 19, 2022.


Uses
Before taking
Side effects
Ingredients
Dosage
FAQ


What is Sklice Lotion?
Sklice is a nonprescription lotion used to treat head lice in people 6 months of age and older.
Sklice is for topical use on the hair and scalp only.
It is not known if it is safe and effective for children under 6 months of age.
Before using Sklice Lotion
Before using Sklice Lotion, tell your healthcare provider if you or your child:

have any skin conditions or sensitivities.
are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. It is not known if Sklice Lotion can harm your unborn baby.
are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. Ivermectin has been found in breast milk when taken by mouth and may pass into breast milk after using Sklice Lotion. If you use Sklice Lotion and breastfeed your baby:

avoid accidental transfer of Sklice Lotion to your breast to help prevent ingestion by your baby.
talk to your healthcare provider about the best way to feed your baby during treatment with Sklice Lotion.



 Sklice pregnancy and breastfeeding warnings (more detail)
How should I use Sklice Lotion?

Use exactly as directed.
Use when your hair is dry.
It is important to use enough lotion to completely coat all of your hair and scalp. Leave on your hair and scalp for a full 10 minutes and then rinse off with water.
You need to completely cover all the scalp and hair with lotion.
Children will need an adult to apply Sklice Lotion for them.
Do not swallow. If swallowed, call your healthcare provider or go to the nearest emergency room right away.
Do not get the lotion into your eyes. If it gets in your eye, gently flush with water.
Wash your hands after application.

When you complete your dose of Sklice Lotion, do not use again without talking to your healthcare provider first.
 Detailed Sklice dosage information 

Related/similar drugs
ivermectin topical, sodium chloride topical, permethrin topical, acetic acid topical, Elimite, lindane topical
Sklice Lotion side effects
The most common side effects include:

eye redness or soreness
eye irritation
dandruff
dry skin
burning sensation of the skin

Tell your healthcare provider if you have any side effect that bothers you or that does not go away.
These are not all the possible side effects. For more information, ask your healthcare provider or pharmacist.
Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report side effects to the FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088.
 Sklice side effects (more detail)
How should I store Sklice Lotion?

Store at room temperature between 68°F to 77°F (20°C to 25°C).
Do not freeze.
Safely throw away any unused Sklice Lotion.

Keep all medicines out of reach of children.
What are the ingredients in Sklice Lotion?
Active ingredient: ivermectin
Inactive ingredients: water, olive oil, oleyl alcohol, Crodalan AWS, lanolin alcohol, cyclomethicone, shea butter, sodium citrate, sorbitan tristearate, methylparaben, propylparaben, and citric acid.
Instructions for Use
Before you use Sklice Lotion, it is important that you read the Instructions for Use so that you use Sklice Lotion the right way. Ask your healthcare provider or pharmacist if you have questions.

Your hair and scalp must be dry before application.
Use the top of cap to break the tamper seal on the tube.
Apply lotion directly to dry hair and scalp.
Completely cover your scalp and hair closest to the scalp first, and then apply outwards towards the ends of your hair.
Rub Sklice Lotion throughout your hair.
It is important to completely cover your entire head so that all lice and eggs are exposed to the lotion. Be sure that each hair is coated from the scalp to the tip.
Use up to 1 entire tube (4 oz) to completely cover hair and scalp.
Allow the lotion to stay on your hair and scalp for 10 minutes after it has been applied. Use a timer or clock. Start timing after you have completely covered your hair and scalp with the lotion.
After 10 minutes, completely rinse the lotion from your hair and scalp using only water.
You or anyone who helps you apply Sklice Lotion should wash their hands after application.
Do not use again without talking to your healthcare provider first.

How do I stop the spread of lice?
To help prevent the spread of lice from one person to another, here are some steps you can take:

Avoid direct head-to-head contact with anyone known to have live, crawling lice.
Do not share combs, brushes, hats, scarves, bandannas, ribbons, barrettes, hair bands, towels, helmets, or other hair-related personal items with anyone else, whether they have lice or not.
Avoid sleepovers and slumber parties during lice outbreaks. Lice can live in bedding, pillows, and carpets that have recently been used by someone with lice.
After finishing treatment with lice medicine, check everyone in your family for lice after one week. Be sure to talk to your healthcare provider about treatments for those who have lice.
Machine wash any bedding and clothing used by anyone having lice. Machine wash at high temperatures (150°F) and tumble in a hot dryer for 20 minutes.

Popular FAQ


How long does it take for Soolantra to start working? 
In two clinical studies, Soolantra (ivermectin 1%) cream was more effective than a vehicle cream (a topical cream without the drug) starting at 4 weeks after the start of treatment. In one US study, patients saw 27% fewer bumps and blemishes after 2 weeks, and up to 75% fewer symptoms after 12 weeks. Continue reading


How often should I use Soolantra? 
Soolantra (ivermectin 1%) cream is approved to be used once a day only on the face for the treatment of rosacea, or as directed by your doctor. Continue reading


More FAQ

How long does it take for Sklice (ivermectin) to kill head lice?
Can you use Soolantra and metronidazole together?
Does Soolantra Cream help with redness?


More about Sklice (ivermectin topical)

Compare alternatives
Reviews (46)
Side effects
Dosage information
During pregnancy
FDA approval history
Drug class: topical anti-infectives
Breastfeeding

Patient resources
Other brandsSoolantra
Professional resources

Prescribing Information

Related treatment guides

Head Lice


Further informationAlways consult your healthcare provider to ensure the information displayed on this page applies to your personal circumstances.
Medical Disclaimer





Drug Status




Availability
					Over the counter
OTC





Pregnancy & Lactation
					Risk data available






CSA Schedule*
					Not a controlled drug
N/A




Loading...





Approval History
					Drug history at FDA





Loading...








User Reviews & Ratings

6.6 / 10

46 Reviews





 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 



 








Drugs.com Mobile Apps
The easiest way to lookup drug information, identify pills, check interactions and set up your own personal medication records. Available for Android and iOS devices.
Explore Apps








Support

Help center
Sitemap
Contact us



About

About Drugs.com
Advertising policy
Attribution & citations



Terms & privacy

Editorial policy
Privacy policy
Terms of use






Follow Drugs.com on Facebook  



Follow Drugs.com on Twitter  



Follow Drugs.com on Pinterest  



Follow Drugs.com on YouTube  



Subscribe to Drugs.com newsletters  


Subscribe to Drugs.com newsletters for the latest medication news, new drug approvals, alerts and updates.




Drugs.com provides accurate and independent information on more than 24,000 prescription drugs, over-the-counter medicines and natural products. This material is provided for educational purposes only and is not intended for medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. Data sources include IBM Watson Micromedex (updated 2 Apr 2023), Cerner Multum™ (updated 17 Apr 2023), ASHP (updated 10 Apr 2023) and others.











Ad Choices








We comply with the HONcode standard for trustworthy health information.


				Copyright © 2000-2023 Drugs.com. All rights reserved.
























