Document Name: role of Fragrance in Massage Cream2
Document link: https://www.massagemag.com/earth-friendly-or-organic-principles-play-a-role-in-massage-cream-preferences-26858/













Earth-Friendly or Organic? Principles Play a Role in Massage Cream Preferences - MASSAGE Magazine














































































































Home
About
Subscribe

Subscriber Login
E-News


Insurance Plus Login
 





Menu








 

 


Massage Insurance

Massage Therapy Insurance
Reiki Insurance
Bodyworker Insurance
Policy Details
Health Insurance
Get Insured


CEUs

Massage CEUs
CE Resource Guide


News

Massage News
COVID-19
Press Releases
Sponsored Editorials


Practice

Clientele
State Massage Laws
Practice Building
Research
Self-Care
Technique


Resources

Careers
Kinesiology Taping and LMT Tools
Insurance Guide
Massage Creams
MBLEx REVIEW
MASSAGE CE
Massage Modalities
Massage Tables
Pregnancy and Infant Massage
Topical Pain Relief


Education

Webinars
Massage eBooks
Guide to Massage School
Students
Videos


Events

Post Event
Become an Events Poster


Products

Products Directory
Submit a Product
Vendor Login
Get Insured Today
Subscribe Today


Advertise

Media Kit
Upload Advertising
Contact Us


Get Insured
 



HomeResource CentersMassage & Spa Topical Products









Earth-Friendly or Organic? Principles Play a Role in Massage Cream Preferences
September 15, 2014Brandi SchlossbergMassage & Spa Topical Products 






It’s fairly obvious that ingredients play a key role in how well a massage cream performs and satisfies both those who are using it and those who are receiving its application. This holds true when it comes to the consistency and texture of the massage cream, too, as well as any fragrance or other more active component of the product.
On the front end, however, ingredients are also an important deciding factor in whether a professional massage therapist or bodyworker even chooses to consider using a specific product in the first place.

For many touch therapy practitioners, there may be certain ingredients that are black and white deal breakers, whereas other components may be must-have components. Much of this depends on the individual practitioner and his or her preferences and principles.
For example, if a massage therapist is committed to recycling and other methods of living that aim to protect natural resources, then her principles might dictate which massage creams would even begin to consider purchasing.
In this scenario, it might be important to the massage therapist that the cream be packaged and shipped in recycled materials with little to no waste. This principle of protecting natural resources may extend even further, causing her to consider only those products that contain ingredients that were grown, harvested, processed and manufactured using environmentally-friendly methods.
The bodyworker who is committed to eating only organic foods and using only organic products is another good example. This principle could extend into the practitioner’s work life, leading him to look for massage creams that contain only organic ingredients.
In many cases, these two principles—protecting natural resources and a commitment to going organic—may be intertwined, along with other principles and preferences.
On a more basic level, massage therapists or bodyworks may just have one or two ingredients that they refuse to have in their massage creams, such as parabens and other synthetic preservatives. Another common deal breaker are products that either do or do not contain fragrances—some practitioners prefer no scent, while others like to have an aroma, as long as it comes from all-natural essential oils.
The list of must-haves and deal breakers varies from practitioner to practitioner, most frequently based on the main modality or modalities of practice. The biggest factor to consider when it comes to choosing a massage cream should always be whether the lubricant allows you to apply your chosen techniques in the best possible manner, hopefully enhancing your services—and never detracting from them.

 
10

If you enjoyed reading this MASSAGE Magazine online article, SUBSCRIBE to the print magazine for more articles about massage news, techniques, self-care, research, business and more, delivered monthly. SUBSCRIBE to our e-newsletter for additional unique content, including product announcements and special offers.
 

 
10

 










 Seeing is Believing: Recover From Summer With Hand & Stone Massage and Facial Spa Bonding 101: Massage for Adopted Babies






×Close




Search



 
Current Issue 
What’s inside?

 Massage in Pain Management
Trigger Points & Myofascial Pain Syndrome
Address Pain with CrainoSacral Therapy
SPECIAL: Body Mechanics for the Pregnant MT
Pediatric Massage: Give Children a Voice in Their Health Care
Thai Massage

» View Current Issue





Join 250,000+ Massage Therapists
Get our latest news, articles, techniques, and self-care delivered to your email inbox.
















Sign Up










 
 
Free Download






Trending Articles 




 



The Jacquelyn Project: Don’t Overlook Tools

1 






 



Massage News for Today’s MT

1 






 



The Fit MT: The Right Body Mechanics Can Help You Work During Pregnancy

1 






 



Advanced Business Strategies: How to Sell a Massage Business

1 



Connect With Us 


















Home
About Us
Massage Insurance
Massage CEUs
Contact Us
Subscribe
Continuing Education
Advertise
Coronavirus (COVID-19)
 

DIGITAL SUBSCRIPTIONSign up to receive free digital issues of MASSAGE Magazine directly to your mailbox. 


3948 3rd Street South #279Jacksonville Beach, FL 32250P: 904.285.6020    



Privacy Policy & Terms of Service | Comment Policy | Copyright © 2023
Insurance Plus is included as a member benefit of Protection Plan Association, Inc., an association for health, wellness and beauty professionals and students created for the purpose of providing valuable and important benefits and services to its members. Insurance Plus is not an insurer.













×Close




Search


































































