Document Name: role of Cetyl Alcohol in Cream2
Document link: https://www.webmd.com/drugs/2/drug-32603/cetyl-alcohol-topical/details




Cetyl Alcohol Topical: Uses, Side Effects, Interactions, Pictures, Warnings & Dosing - WebMD




 


























 Skip to main content  Check Your Symptoms  Find A Doctor  Find A Dentist Health  A-Z Health A-Z  Common Conditions   ADD/ADHD  Allergies  Arthritis  Cancer  Coronavirus (COVID-19)  Depression  Diabetes  Eye Health  Heart Disease  Lung Disease  Orthopedics  Pain Management  Sexual Conditions  Skin Problems  Sleep Disorders  View All  Resources   Symptom Checker  WebMD Blogs  Podcasts  Newsletters  WebMD Magazine  Best Hospitals  Find a Doctor  Surgeries and Procedures A-Z  Featured Topics  Slideshow  Signs You Have Already Had COVID  Slideshow  Get Help for Migraine Relief Drugs &  Supplements Drugs & Supplements  Find & Review   Drugs  Supplements  Drug Basics & Safety   Commonly Abused Drugs  Taking Meds When Pregnant  Tools   Manage Your Medications  Pill Identifier  Check for Interactions  Drug Comparison Tool  Featured Topics  Slideshow  Vitamins You Need as You Age  Coronavirus  COVID-19 Vaccines Living  Healthy Living Healthy  Diet, Food & Fitness   Diet & Weight Management  Weight Loss & Obesity  Food & Recipes  Fitness & Exercise  Beauty & Balance   Healthy Beauty  Health & Balance  Sex & Relationships  Oral Care  Living Well   Women's Health  Men's Health  Aging Well  Healthy Sleep  Healthy Teens  Featured Topics  Article  Smart Grocery Shopping When You Have Diabetes  Quiz  Do You Know the Benefits of Walking? Family &  Pregnancy Family & Pregnancy  All About Pregnancy   Getting Pregnant  First Trimester  Second Trimester  Third Trimester  View All  Parenting Guide   Newborn & Baby  Children's Health  Children's Vaccines  View All  Pet Care Essentials   Healthy Cats  Healthy Dogs  View All  Featured Topics  Slideshow  Smart Snacks When You're Pregnant  Slideshow  Surprising Things You Didn't Know About Dogs and Cats News &  Experts News & Experts  Health News   Pets May Actually Help Fight Allergies  Mediterranean, Low-Fat Diets Are Best for Heart Problems  Least Amount of Exercise You Need to Stay Healthy  Nerve 'Pulse' Therapy May Help Ease Sciatica  Who Is Most Likely to Get Long COVID?  Experts & Community   Support Groups  Blogs  Webinars  News Center  New Book: Take Control of Your Heart Disease Risk  Featured Topics  WebMD Editorial Special  MINOCA: The Heart Attack You Didn’t See Coming  Get Our Newsletters  Health News and Information, Delivered to Your Inbox  Sign In  Mobile Apps  Subscriptions  Privacy and More  Sign In  Subscribe  MENU DRUGS AND MEDICATIONS CENTERFind a DrugMy MedicinePill IdentifierInteraction CheckerFind a VitaminFind a PharmacyVITAMINS & SUPPLEMENTS CENTERFind a Vitamin or SupplementVitamin Lifestyle GuideAssess Your Vitamin NeedsFIRST AID RESOURCESFirst Aid HomeFirst Aid Kit & Wound CareFirst Aid Mobile Drugs & Medications  Cetyl Alcohol Lotion  Cetyl Alcohol Lotion - Uses, Side Effects, and More Generic Name(S): cetyl alcohol  View Free Coupon  Uses  Side Effects  Precautions  Interactions  Overdose  Images  Reviews (0)  Uses This medication is used as a moisturizer to treat or prevent dry, rough, scaly, itchy skin and minor skin irritations (such as diaper rash, skin burns from radiation therapy). Emollients are substances that soften and moisturize the skin and decrease itching and flaking. Some products (such as zinc oxide, white petrolatum) are used mostly to protect the skin against irritation (such as from wetness).Dry skin is caused by a loss of water in the upper layer of the skin. Emollients/moisturizers work by forming an oily layer on the top of the skin that traps water in the skin. Petrolatum, lanolin, mineral oil and dimethicone are common emollients. Humectants, including glycerin, lecithin, and propylene glycol, draw water into the outer layer of skin. Many products also have ingredients that soften the horny substance (keratin) that holds the top layer of skin cells together (including urea, alpha hydroxy acids such as lactic/citric/glycolic acid, and allantoin). This helps the dead skin cells fall off, helps the skin keep in more water, and leaves the skin feeling smoother and softer. How to use Cetyl Alcohol Lotion Use this product as directed. Some products require priming before use. Follow all directions on the product package. If you have any questions, ask your doctor or pharmacist.Some products need to be shaken before use. Check the label to see if you should shake the bottle well before using. Apply to the affected areas of the skin as needed or as directed on the label or by your doctor. How often you apply the medication will depend on the product and your skin condition. To treat dry hands, you may need to use the product every time you wash your hands, applying it throughout the day.If you are using this product to help treat diaper rash, clean the diaper area well before use and allow the area to dry before applying the product.If you are using this product to help treat radiation skin burns, check with radiation personnel to see if your brand can be applied before radiation therapy.Follow all the directions on the label for proper use. Apply to the skin only. Avoid sensitive areas such as your eyes, inside your mouth/nose, and the vaginal/groin area, unless the label or your doctor directs you otherwise. Check the label for directions about any areas or types of skin where you should not apply the product (such as on the face, any areas of broken/chapped/cut/irritated/scraped skin, or on a recently shaved area of the skin). Consult your doctor or pharmacist for more details.Use this medication regularly to get the most benefit from it. Most moisturizers need water to work well. Apply the product after bathing/showering while the skin is still damp. For very dry skin, your doctor may instruct you to soak the area before using the product. Long, hot, or frequent bathing/washing can worsen dry skin.If your condition lasts or gets worse, or if you think you may have a serious medical problem, get medical help right away. Side Effects Most emollients can be used safely and effectively with no side effects. However, burning, stinging, redness, or irritation may occur. If any of these effects last or get worse, tell your doctor or pharmacist promptly.If your doctor has prescribed this medication, remember that your doctor has judged that the benefit to you is greater than the risk of side effects. Many people using this medication do not have serious side effects.Tell your doctor right away if you have any serious side effects, including: unusual changes in the skin (such as turning white/soft/soggy from too much wetness), signs of skin infection.A very serious allergic reaction to this drug is rare. However, get medical help right away if you notice any symptoms of a serious allergic reaction, including: rash, itching/swelling (especially of the face/tongue/throat), severe dizziness, trouble breathing.This is not a complete list of possible side effects. If you notice other effects not listed above, contact your doctor or pharmacist. In the US - Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report side effects to FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or at www.fda.gov/medwatch.In Canada - Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report side effects to Health Canada at 1-866-234-2345. Precautions Before using this product, tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to any of the ingredients in the product; or if you have any other allergies. This product may contain inactive ingredients, which can cause allergic reactions or other problems. Talk to your pharmacist for more details.If you have any of the following health problems, consult your doctor or pharmacist before using this product: skin cuts/infections/sores.Some ingredients (such as preservatives, fragrance) may make you more sensitive to the sun. Check the label for any warnings or ask your doctor or pharmacist if you need to take any special precautions when in the sun. Your doctor/pharmacist may suggest that you limit your time in the sun, avoid tanning booths and sunlamps, and use sunscreen and wear protective clothing when outdoors. Tell your doctor right away if you get sunburned or have skin blisters/redness.Some products may worsen acne. If your skin is prone to acne breakouts, look for the word "non-comedogenic" (will not clog pores) on the label. Some products may stain/discolor clothing. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for more details.Before having surgery, tell your doctor or dentist about all the products you use (including prescription drugs, nonprescription drugs, and herbal products).Tell your doctor if you are pregnant before using this product.It is unknown if this product passes into breast milk. Consult your doctor before breast-feeding, especially if you are applying this product to the breast area. Interactions Drug interactions may change how your medications work or increase your risk for serious side effects. This document does not contain all possible drug interactions. Keep a list of all the products you use (including prescription/nonprescription drugs and herbal products) and share it with your doctor and pharmacist. Do not start, stop, or change the dosage of any medicines without your doctor's approval. Does Cetyl Alcohol Lotion interact with other drugs you are taking?  Enter your medication into the WebMD interaction checker  Check Interaction  Overdose This medicine may be harmful if swallowed. If someone has overdosed and has serious symptoms such as passing out or trouble breathing, call 911. Otherwise, call a poison control center right away. US residents can call their local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. Canada residents can call a provincial poison control center. Notes Some ways to help prevent dry skin include using lukewarm (not hot) water when bathing, taking baths/showers less often (such as every 1-2 days), keeping baths/showers short, and using a humidifier when the air is very dry.There are many types of emollient products available. Some contain fragrance or other ingredients that some people may be sensitive to. Emollients are available in different forms such as oils, creams, lotions, or sprays. Consult with your doctor or pharmacist on the product that may be best for you. Missed Dose If you are using this product on a regular schedule and miss a dose, use it as soon as you remember. Do not use more product or use it more often than directed to catch up. Storage Refer to storage information printed on the package. If you have any questions about storage, ask your pharmacist. Keep all medications away from children and pets.Do not store the foam canister near high heat, and do not store or use it near an open flame. Because foam canisters are under pressure, do not puncture or burn the canister.Do not flush medications down the toilet or pour them into a drain unless instructed to do so. Properly discard this product when it is expired or no longer needed. Consult your pharmacist or local waste disposal company. Images  Next Free RX CouponSave up to 80% on your prescriptions. View FREE WebMDRx coupon Available coupons Save up to 80% on your prescription with  WebMDRx  View FREE WebMDRx coupon You Might Also Like Cold or Flu? How to Tell  Treating Opioid Use Disorder With Medications  Taking Prescription Opioids?  Navigating Life With Migraine Related Links Who should not take Cetyl Alcohol Lotion?  Search Drugs  Related Drugs Common Searches  Adderall  Celexa  Cipro  Cymbalta  Flexeril  Hydrocodone  Prilosec  Prozac  Seroquel  Synthroid  Tramadol  Trazodone  Lexapro  Lisinopril  Mobic  Naproxen  Neurontin  Pradaxa  Prednisone  Vicodin  Warfarin  Wellbutrin  Xanax  Zocor  Zoloft  Show More  Show Less  No related drugs found for this medication  Drug Survey  Have you ever purchased Cetyl Alcohol Lotion? Yes, In the past 3 monthsYes, In the past 6 monthsYes, In the past yearHaven't purchased but consideringDon't plan to purchase This survey is being conducted by the WebMD marketing sciences department.  Selected from data included with permission and copyrighted by First Databank, Inc. This copyrighted material has been downloaded from a licensed data provider and is not for distribution, except as may be authorized by the applicable terms of use.  CONDITIONS OF USE: The information in this database is intended to supplement, not substitute for, the expertise and judgment of healthcare professionals. The information is not intended to cover all possible uses, directions, precautions, drug interactions or adverse effects, nor should it be construed to indicate that use of a particular drug is safe, appropriate or effective for you or anyone else. A healthcare professional should be consulted before taking any drug, changing any diet or commencing or discontinuing any course of treatment. Today on WebMD Medications That Make You Tired  Common culprits and what you can do.  Pharmacy and Medication Tips  Things to remember when you fill your prescription.  Medication Side Effects  Tips for dealing with them.  Reading Medicine Labels  How to make sense of them. More About Drugs and MedicationsPill IdentifierMy MedicineInteraction CheckerDrugs and Medications A-ZDrugs and Medical ConditionsLatest Drug NewsFind a Pharmacy Find a Vitamin Health Solutions from Our Sponsors Penis Curved When Erect?  Could I have CAD?  Treat Bent Fingers  Treat HR+, HER2- MBC  Tired of Dandruff?  Benefits of CBD  Rethink MS Treatment  AFib-Related Strokes  Risk of a Future DVT/PE  Is My Penis Normal?  Relapsing MS Options  Liver Transplants Save Lives  Finance Plastic Surgery  Bent Finger Causes  Living With Psoriasis?  Missing Teeth? More from WebMD 5 Tips to Help With Relapsing MS  How to Thrive With Narcolepsy  Relief for Blocked Hair Follicles  Psoriatic Arthritis and Your Sleep  What Psoriasis Feels Like  First Psoriatic Arthritis Flare  Talking to Your Doctor About RA  Crohn's: A 'Full-Body' Disease  Avoiding Crohn’s Flares  Health Benefits of Hemp Seed Oil  Live Better With Psoriatic Disease  Types of B-Cell Therapy for MS  5 Health Benefits of Hemp  Why Prostate Cancer Spreads  Living with Advanced Breast Cancer  Where Breast Cancer Spreads  Find us on:  Facebook  Twitter  Pinterest  Policies  Privacy Policy  Cookie Policy  Editorial Policy  Advertising Policy  Correction Policy  Terms of Use  About  Contact Us  About WebMD  Careers  Newsletter  Corporate  WebMD Health Services  Site Map  Accessibility  Our Apps  WebMD Mobile  WebMD App  Pregnancy  Baby  Allergy  For Advertisers  Advertise with Us  Advertising Policy © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, an Internet Brands company. All rights reserved.WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information. 








