Document Name: role of Imwitor 375 (Glyceryl Citrate/Lactate/Linoleate/Oleate) in Eye Cream2
Document link: https://www.schoolofnaturalskincare.com/palm-oil-free-lotion-recipe/










Palm Oil-free Face Lotion Formula: Floral Moisturizing Fluid - School of Natural Skincare







































































































 






hello@schoolofnaturalskincare.com
 

Student Log in
The Club Log in
Contact
  
 
 










MENUMENUNew here?



 

Online Courses





Short Courses

Certificate in Natural Face Mask Formulation 
 


Beginners

Certificate in Making Natural Skincare ProductsCertificate in Cold Process Soapmaking 
 


Intermediate

Diploma in Natural Skincare FormulationDiploma in Natural Haircare FormulationDiploma in Formulating Natural Makeup and Advanced Color CosmeticsDiploma in Soap Making 
 


Advanced

Advanced Certificate in High-Performance Serum Formulation 
 


Course bundles

Beginner to FormulatorSkincare SpecialistNatural Haircare and Skincare Formulator 
 
 

Membership Program

Natural Cosmetic Formulation Club

Learn about the ClubFormulating Mineral MakeupNatural Surfactants 

Articles & Recipes

Getting started

Getting startedStudyingWellbeing tips 
Recipes & Formulating

Skincare FormulationHaircare FormulationMakeup FormulationNatural Soap MakingFacial Skincare RecipesBodycare Recipes 
Ingredients/Business

Natural Skincare IngredientsEssential OilsRecommended SuppliersBeauty Business Advice 

About

Our SchoolOur Tutors and TeamAccreditations and MembershipsBookCharity PartnershipsStudent Success StoriesJob Opportunities
FAQ 





Select Page


  
 



 



 







Palm Oil-free Face Lotion Formula: Floral Moisturizing FluidNatural Facial skincare recipes
 






Many of our students are interested in using palm oil-free emulsifiers. Palm oil is so prevalent in the cosmetics industry that palm oil-free options are still fairly limited. 
Our team of formulators have been trialling six palm oil-free emulsifiers with great success and you can learn about them and how to formulate with them in our Diploma in Natural Skincare Formulation. 
 
Palm oil-free emulsifier: Imwitor 375 (INCI: Glyceryl Citrate, Lactate, Linoleate, Oleate) 
Imwitor 375 is one of the emulsifiers we love, for several reasons:

It’s palm oil-free.
It’s approved for us in natural cosmetics by COSMOS/Ecocert. 
It can be used in both hot or cold process emulsions.
It is ideal for creating fluid, low viscosity emulsions (which not all emulsifiers are suitable for).
It is a cost effective emulsifier as only a small amount is required.

You can find out more about Imwitor 375 in our article Natural Palm Oil-free Emulsifier for Natural Cosmetics: Imwitor 375.
 
Palm oil-free Floral Moisturizing Fluid Formula 
This formula creates a light, low viscosity facial moisturizing fluid. It is a very hydrating and non-greasy formula, with a delicate floral aroma. All the ingredients are permitted in COSMOS-approved natural cosmetics. 






















Formula ingredients
Emollients
We wanted to create a light feeling moisturizing fluid so we chose light feeling carrier oils: evening primrose oil, borage oil and raspberry seed oil. These oils are quick to absorb, have a light skin feel and leave the skin soft and nourished but not oily. 
Borage oil and evening primrose oil are sources of gamma-linolenic acid (an omega 6 fatty acid), which helps speed up cell regeneration, promote healthy growth, improve the skin’s barrier repair function and alleviate inflammation. Raspberry seed oil and evening primrose oil contain decent amounts of linoleic acid which assists in skin barrier function and repair, which reduces TEWL, leading to hydrated, soft and moisturized skin.
Humectants 
We used two different humectants (glycerin and hyaluronic acid) to make this a very hydrating moisturizing fluid. For the formula to be palm oil-free you’ll need to ensure that the glycerin you use is palm oil-free (check with your supplier). 
Emulsifier
Imwitor 375 (INCI: Glyceryl Citrate, Lactate, Linoleate, Oleate) is our chosen emulsifier as it is very good at creating low viscosity, fluid emulsions and its palm oil-free! We haven’t used fatty alcohols as they would thicken this formula too much. 
Preservative system
We have used Geogard 221 (INCI: Dehydroacetic Acid (and) Benzyl Alcohol) as our primary preservative blend. We have added potassium sorbate as our secondary preservative/preservative booster. And we have also used Dermofeel PA-3 (INCI: Sodium Phytate (and) Aqua (and) Alcohol) as our chelating agent. 
We submitted this product for preservative efficacy testing (also known as PET or challenge testing). This means the sample is inoculated with gram positive bacteria, gram negative bacteria, yeast and mold to see how effective the preservative system is. This product passed this rigorous laboratory test, meaning the product is protected against microbial proliferation that may present a potential risk to the user. Discover more about creating broad-spectrum preservative blends here.
Dermofeel PA-3 is the trade name for a commercial chelating agent that contains sodium phytate as its key ingredient. Sodium phytate can be purchased from Lotioncrafter (USA), New Directions (Australia), Formulator Sample Shop (USA) and Skin Chakra (Germany). If you can’t obtain it you could omit it from the formula (this may affect the preservative efficacy). You’ll learn more about chelating agents on our Diploma in Natural Skincare Formulation.
Essential oils 
This product is fragranced with natural essential oils – geranium essential oil and lavender essential oil – giving this product a beautiful floral aroma. Both essential oils are antiseptic and promote skin healing. 
Antioxidant
Vitamin E (INCI: Tocopherol) is our chosen antioxidant.
Formula




Phase


Trade name


INCI name


w/w%


Function




A


Purified water


Aqua


76.6


Diluent/solvent




A


Glycerin (palm oil-free)


Glycerin


2.0


Humectant




A


Hyaluronic acid


Sodium Hyaluronate


       0.4


Humectant 




A


Dermofeel PA-3


Sodium Phytate (and) Aqua (and) Alcohol


0.1


Chelating agent




B


Evening primrose oil


Oenothera Biennis Oil


6.0


Emollient




B


Borage oil


Borago Officinalis Seed Oil


6.0


Emollient




B


Imwitor 375


Glyceryl Citrate, Lactate, Linoleate, Oleate


5.0


Emulsifier




B


Raspberry seed oil


Rubus Idaeus Seed Oil


2.0


Emollient




C


Geogard 221


Dehydroacetic Acid, Benzyl Alcohol


1.0


Preservative




C


Geranium essential oil


Pelargonium Graveolens Oil


0.3


Fragrance




C


Lavender essential oil


Lavandula Angustifolia Flower Oil


0.3


Fragrance




C


Potassium sorbate


Potassium Sorbate


0.2


Preservative booster




C


Vitamin E (95% mixed tocopherols)


Tocopherol


0.1


Antioxidant




 
Formula instructions

Weigh out the water. 
Set aside 1-2ml of the water for dissolving potassium sorbate in phase C.
Add Dermofeel PA-3 to the remaining water.
Premix glycerin with hyaluronic acid. Add to the rest of the phase A ingredients. 
Mix phase A together well. Set aside for several hours until the hyaluronic acid has hydrated.
Weigh all of the phase B ingredients into a beaker.
Heat both phases to 70-80°C until all the ingredients have melted. 
Add phase B to phase A and emulsify with a stick blender.
Premix potassium sorbate with the retained 1-2ml water until dissolved.
Once the mixture has cooled to below 40°C add the ingredients in phase C, one at a time, mixing in between each addition.
Check and adjust the pH. For us, this product is pH 5.45 before adjustment and we adjusted it to pH 5.0 using 0.5% of a 10% citric acid solution.

To find out more about creating emulsions, the different ingredients and techniques you can use, how to adjust the viscosity, how to adjust the pH, how to formulate for different skin types and much more, join our Diploma in Natural Skincare Formulation.



 
FREE GUIDE:
The Beginner's Guide to Formulating Natural Skincare Products (From scratch, like a professional!)
Start creating your own natural skincare productsfrom scratch - rather than simply following recipes!
Exclusive for our newsletter subscribers. Sign up now.





















Download this fabulous guide and you'll learn:

What formulating is and why you need to be doing it!
The difference between following recipes and formulating your own products.
How to formulate like a pro! Seven top tips for becoming a confident skincare formulator.
Our step-by-step process to designing products people love.
Four easy ways to personalize your skincare products.
Choosing the right carrier oils for your beauty products.

PLUS: Receive two free worksheets!




Loved reading this article? Make sure to remember by pinning it!
























 

You might also like:


















Jojoba in Natural Skincare and Haircare: Properties,…


















Natural Palm Oil-free Emulsifier for Natural Cosmetics:…


















How to Achieve Healthy, Glowing Skin: Skincare Tips for Oily…


















Holiday Recipe Guide – Perfect Natural Skincare Products for…


















Free Men’s Beard Oil Recipe: Conditioning Argan and Cedar…


















Carrier Oils: Finding the right carrier oil for your skin

























Become a naturalskincare formulator!Sign up for our free newsletter and get our best product making tips, expert formulating advice and course offers... plus our Natural Beauty Recipe Book.
We take care of your data in accordance with our privacy policy. 
 



















Yes! Sign me up






You have Successfully Subscribed!




  

 
 
 










Sign up for our newsletter to receive our best tips, course offers and NaturalBeauty Recipe BookWe take care of your data in accordance with our privacy policy.














Yes! Sign me up






You have Successfully Subscribed!




See what our students are saying…I’m truly delighted“I must confess this course is good value for money. Honestly all I expected was the course material and a certificate! I’m truly delighted with this extra bonus and all the prompt online support we get!”Mary Um Mustafa, UKThis course is the one you want… trust me!“I had my eye on this course for over a year. I was choosing between this course and two others. I decided to start with another one, and to be honest I made a huge mistake – I should have gotten this one from the beginning because it is SO detailed and gives you everything you need to become a great formulator! It is mapped out in such a way that is so easy to understand and you are excited to keep going. The course helped me to really grasp the information and take it in. Maybe there are other people out there deciding between courses… don’t go with the others! You will end up frustrated like I was. This course is the one you want… trust me!”Tamara Hinds, CanadaMy clients are loving the new creations I am making.“My clients are loving the new creations I am making. I am so happy I came across your site and decided to take this course.”Veerpal Sidhu, CanadaI found the course addictive!“I found the course addictive! I have come a long way in the last few months with my formulating and have found the course to be exactly what I needed”Carol White, UKThis class has been so awesome!“This class has been so awesome! Formulating is so much fun after all!”Raquel LoVetere Curtin, USAI gained priceless knowledge“I gained priceless knowledge and it has now given me the motivation to pursue an interest and hopefully a business. Thank you!” Femi Robinson, UKThe results are bombastic!“Now I’ve completed the Certificate in Making Natural Skincare Products, I really want to say a BIG thank you for teaching me this knowledge! I continued experimenting with my own products, such as a serum oil for congested oily skin and blocked pores. The results are bombastic! Only one overnight application and next morning the blackheads and whiteheads were easily removed! My oil massage works great, especially for the joints, and it healed cramped and numb muscles.I recommend the Certificate in Making Natural Skincare Products with the School of Natural Skincare for those who want to learn how to make their own skincare products. You can sign up at any time and it really sets you up for a bright future with your own skincare business!”Carol Rudy Darius, AustraliaI have really enjoyed all the inspirations“I have really enjoyed all the inspirations and different ways of thinking about my future that your courses have opened up for me! Thanks for all your amazing work”Liv Henrich, New ZealandI have loved doing every aspect of the course“I have loved doing every aspect of the course and can’t wait to keep improving on these skills with other products” Leonie Turenne, AustraliaThe course has revolutionised my life!“The course has revolutionised my life! My skin is so much healthier and full of life. You are truly an inspiration!”Lu Brown, UKThe Diploma in Natural Skincare Formulation was simply extraordinary!“The Diploma in Natural Skincare Formulation was simply extraordinary! It exceeded my expectations.”Heather Weinbauer-Literski, USAProudly seen inFind Us on Facebook 
School of Natural Skincare


We’re accredited!Follow us         

Study with usCertificate in Making Natural Skincare Products
Diploma in Natural Skincare Formulation
Diploma in Natural Haircare Formulation
Advanced Certificate in High-Performance Serum Formulation
Other informationStudent log in


Search for:



 
 
 
 




 The School of Natural Skincare International is a multi-award-winning online natural cosmetic formulation school. Our accredited, multimedia online courses cover every aspect of skincare and haircare formulation and are studied from home, wherever our students are in the world, via our online classroom, and with tutor and community support every step of the way.

Company Information Privacy Notice
Terms and Conditions
Anti-racism Statement
The School of Natural Skincare is a trading name of Goodness & Wonder Ltd, Company Registration Number: 8844378. Registered address 432 Gloucester Road, Bristol, BS7 8TX, UK. VAT registration number GB204082453.

Get in touch We’re here to help and assist you. If you have any questions, you can send us an email at hello@schoolofnaturalskincare.com or use our contact page.

Get social with us          

 




© 2010 - 2022 School of Natural Skincare | All Rights Reserved 
 









Pin It on Pinterest





Shares


















 









Save $200 and get 3 bonus classes FREE when you enroll onto our Diploma in Natural Skincare Formulation. Offer Ends May 4th. 

















 : 






 : 






 : 
























Learn More.














































































