Document Name: role of Glyceryl Stearate in Massage Cream0
Document link: https://www.newdirectionsaromatics.com/blog/products/all-about-glyceryl-stearate-se.html






Glyceryl Stearate SE - Glyceryl Monostearate - Emulsifier & Thickener






































Blog Home
 Articles
 - Aromatherapy - How to Store Essential Oils - Technical Information - Useful Guides Products
 - Absolute Oils - Butters - Carrier Oils - Essential Oils - Botanical Extracts - Cosmetic Raw Materials - Floral Waters - Fragrance Oils - Herbal Oils - Other - Packaging - Spa Recipes
 - Essential Oil Recipes - Lip Balm Recipes - Bath Bomb Recipes - Butter Recipes - Massage Oils and Blends 















 SHOP

  |  

  |  

  |  

  |  











Blog Home|Articles 



AromatherapyHow to Store Essential OilsTechnical InformationUseful Guides




|Products 



Absolute OilsButtersCarrier OilsEssential OilsBotanical ExtractsCosmetic Raw MaterialsFloral WatersFragrance OilsHerbal OilsOtherPackagingSpa




|Recipes 



Essential Oil RecipesLip Balm RecipesBath Bomb RecipesButter RecipesMassage Oils and Blends




 




 







Blog
ProductsALL ABOUT GLYCERYL STEARATE SE 





ALL ABOUT GLYCERYL STEARATE SE



Content

How Does Glyceryl Stearate Work?
Applications For Glyceryl Stearate
Contraindications For Glyceryl Stearate

 

WHAT IS GLYCERYL STEARATE?
Glyceryl Stearate, also referred to as Glyceryl Monostearate, is a fatty acid derived from vegetable oil, Soy Oil, or Palm Kernel Oil; however, it is also naturally occurring in the human body. This wax-like substance appears white or cream in color and is produced when Glycerin and Stearic Acid undergo esterification. Traditionally, it is used in formulations for its emulsifying properties. Glyceryl Stearate SE also contains Sodium Stearate and/or Potassium Stearate. The “SE” of Glyceryl Stearate SE stands for “Self-Emulsifying,” as it is a self-emulsifying form of Glyceryl Stearate.


 
HOW DOES GLYCERYL STEARATE WORK?
When applied topically, its Glycerol constituent makes Glyceryl Stearate SE a fast-penetrating emollient that helps to create a protective barrier on the surface of the skin. This helps retain hydration and slow the loss of moisture. This reduced rate of water evaporation helps to lubricate, condition, soften, and smoothe the skin. Its protective properties extend to its antioxidant qualities, which help protect the skin against damage caused by free radicals.
When added to natural formulations, Glyceryl Stearate and Glyceryl Stearate SE have stabilizing effects on the final product, which means it helps the other ingredients in the formulation to continue functioning effectively in order to go on exhibiting their beneficial properties. In this way, it helps to balance the product’s pH value and thereby prevents the product from becoming overly acidic or alkaline. Furthermore, it helps increase shelf life, prevents products from freezing or from developing crusts on their surfaces, and it helps lessen the greasy nature of some oils that may be added to cosmetics formulations. In formulations that are oil-based, the thickening properties of Glyceryl Stearate SE help to scale down the need for co-emulsifiers and, in emulsions with big water phases, Glyceryl Stearate SE can help develop liquid crystal phases as well as crystalline gel phases. As an opacifier, it makes transparent or translucent preparations opaque, thus protecting them from or increasing their resistance to being penetrated by visible light. This also helps to boost or balance the appearance of pigments and to improve the density of the final product for a luxuriously smooth and creamy texture.
You may be interested in the other cosmetic raw materials supplies as well. 


 
APPLICATIONS FOR GLYCERYL STEARATE SE
Glyceryl Stearate SE must be added to formulations in their heated oil phases. The higher the concentration of Glyceryl Stearate SE, the thicker the end product will be.
 



PRODUCT TYPE & FUNCTION
EFFECTS





When added to this kind of formulation…
 
Shampoo/Conditioner 


Glyceryl Stearate SE functions as a(n):

Moisturizer
Opacifier
Softener
Conditioner
Thickener

 
It helps to:

Hydrate the hair and scalp to protect against dryness
Prevent frizz
Make products opaque in appearance
Increase viscosity
Reduce tangling

The recommended maximum dosage is 2-5%




When added to these kinds of formulations…
 
Makeup
(Foundation, Mascara, Eye Shadow, Eyeliner)


Glyceryl Stearate SE functions as a(n):

Opacifier
Softener
Emollient

 
It helps to:

Soften and smoothe the skin
Balance and sustain the skin's moisture levels without leaving a greasy residue
Keep makeup on the skin, rather than allowing it to fall off
Keep mascara from clumping
Ensure smooth application of eyeliner and eyeshadow

 
The recommended maximum dosage is 2-5%




When added to these kinds of formulations…
 
Moisturizer 
Face Wash 
Face Mask/Peel
Body Wash/Gel


Glyceryl Stearate SE functions as a(n):

Opacifier
Thickener
Co-emulsifier Emollient
Softener
Moisturizer
Cleanser

 
It helps to:

Emulsify formulations and increase their viscosity, which contributes a creamier texture
Lift and remove dirt
Soothe skin
Create an oily layer on the skin’s surface, which helps it retain water
Hydrate and soften the skin to reduce irritation, cracking, and peeling

 
Recommended maximum dosages are:
Body Lotion: 1.5-2.5%
Face Cream: 1.5-2.5%
Sunscreen: 1.5-2.5%
Ointments: 2-5%






 
CONTRAINDICATIONS FOR GLYCERYL STEARATE
As with all other New Directions Aromatics products, Glyceryl Stearate SE Raw Material is for external use only. It is imperative to consult a medical practitioner before using this wax for therapeutic purposes. Pregnant and nursing women, as well as those with sensitive skin, are especially advised not to use Glyceryl Stearate SE Raw Material without the medical advice of a physician. This product should always be stored in an area that is inaccessible to children, especially those under the age of 7.
Prior to using Glyceryl Stearate SE Raw Material, a skin test is recommended. This can be done by melting 1 Glyceryl Stearate wax flake in 1 ml of a preferred Carrier Oil and applying a dime-size amount of this blend to a small area of skin that is not sensitive. Potential side effects of Glyceryl Stearate SE include irritation, rash, stinging, burning, nausea, flatulence, abdominal cramps, and diarrhea. In the event of an allergic reaction, discontinue use of the product and see a doctor, pharmacist, or allergist immediately for a health assessment and appropriate remedial action. To prevent side effects, consult with a medical professional prior to use.



IMPORTANT: All New Directions Aromatics (NDA) products are for external use only unless otherwise indicated. This information is not intended to diagnose, treat, cure, or prevent any disease, and it should not be used by anyone who is pregnant or under the care of a medical practitioner. Please refer to our policies for further details, and our disclaimer below.

Read Disclaimer






Buy Products


Raw MaterialsView our complete range of Raw Materials 
 Glyceryl Stearate SE Raw Material
USD $49.99 (2.2lbs) - $825.17 (50lbs)





Read about Cosmetic Raw Materials Types





ALOE VERA GEL JUICE






ARROWROOT POWDER






BEESWAX






CETYL ALCOHOL






CITRIC ACID






COCO GLUCOSIDE






COLLOIDAL OATMEAL






EXFOLIANTS






FOAMING BATH BUTTER






GRAPEFRUIT SEED EXTRACT






HYALURONIC ACID






MENTHOL CRYSTALS






OLIVE SQUALANE






POWDER BOTANICAL EXTRACTS






POWDERED FRUIT EXTRACTS






ROSEMARY ANTIOXIDANT






SODIUM COCOYL ISETHIONATE






STEARIC ACID






VEGETABLE GLYCERINE






WITCH HAZEL DISTILLATE










Save Up to 15% Off Sitewide! Use Code SPRING2023






Modal title
Close










Copyright ©1997-2023 New Directions Aromatics Inc. 
All rights reserved.


















