Document Name: role of Sorbitol in Eye Cream3
Document link: https://www.pevonia.co.uk/blog/ingredient-focus-what-is-sorbitol/


































































 








INGREDIENT FOCUS: WHAT IS SORBITOL? - Pevonia




















FREE DELIVERY ON ORDERS OVER £40 (EXCL. CHANNEL ISLANDS & ROI*) – FOR EU ORDERS PLEASE CONTACT CUSTOMER CARE




Pevonia
Skincare

Face & Eyes

Dry Skin Line
Sensitive Skin Line
Combination Skin Line
ProCorrective Acne Line
Rosacea Line
Power Repair Line
Eye & Lip Line
Men’s Skincare Line
Radiance Mask Line
Special Line
Micro-Retinol Line
Lumafirm Line
Stem Cells Line


Body Care

Spa At Home
Bathing Pleasures
Daily Hydration
Corrective Care
BodyRenew
Sport and Exercise


Sun & Trial-Travel

Sun Care
Trial / Travel Kits


Accessories

Essentials
Spa Ambience




Shop by Concern

Skin Types & Symptoms

Acne
Acne Scars
Ageing Face
Age Spots
Ageing Body
Blackheads
Blocked Pores
Cellulite
Combination Skin
Crepey Eyes
Crows Feet
Dark Circles
Dehydration
De-Stress
Dry Body
Dry Cuticles
Dry Skin
Dull & Sallow Skin
Eczema or Psoriasis
Enlarged or Open Pores
Fine Lines & Wrinkles
Hair Repair
Hand Sanitisation
In-grown Hairs
Loss of Elasticity
Menopausal Skin
Milia
Oily Skin
Pigmentation
Post Operative
Puffy Eyes
Rosacea
Sagging Skin
Scaly Skin
Scars
Sensitive Skin
Shaving Rash
Skin Redness
Spots & Breakouts
Stretch Marks
Sun Protection
Sunburn
Tension


Products Suitable For …

Face & Body Products Suitable For Vegans
Face & Body Products Suitable for Cancer/Oncology Patients
Face & Body Products Suitable during Pregnancy




Offers

Safe Sun Special Offers
Shop Savings
Perfect Partners
Gift With Purchase Offers
What’s New


Discover Pevonia

Brand Overview
Blog
Media Library
Our Ingredients
Treatments
Careers
Contact Us


Find a Spa
 




















0 



Therapists Lounge







Free delivery on all orders UK over £40 (excl. Channel Islands & ROI)Free gift with every orderNaturally sourced ingredientsCruelty free£10 off your first order when you sign up to our newsletter 

Trustpilot




Home » Blog » INGREDIENT FOCUS » INGREDIENT FOCUS: WHAT IS SORBITOL?INGREDIENT FOCUS: WHAT IS SORBITOL?

What is it?
The majority of sorbitol is made from corn syrup, but may also be obtained from leaves and berries of mountain ash, cherries, apples, peaches, prunes and pears.
Pevonia sourced Sorbitol for their products from Cherries.
How can Sorbitol help my skin?
Sorbitol has a superior water-binding capacity and acts as a natural humectant, which attracts moisture from the air and binds it to your skin cells, slowing its evaporation. Sorbitol will help to promote healthy cell renewal by ensuring the underlying dermis remains fully hydrated, so your complexion looks firm, fresh, and vibrant as the surface cells stay plump.
It is less likely to prove irritating or damaging to sensitive complexions, as the molecules found in Sorbitol are very similar to our own. This makes them easy for the skin to absorb into its deeper layers. Sorbitol is also an excellent substance to use on Oily skin as it will moisturise and lubricate without depositing a greasy film or clogging pores leaving skin silky smooth.
Which Pevonia homecare products contain Sorbitol?
HOME-USE PRODUCTS
Rejuvenating Dry Skin Cream
Nourish, smooth, tone, and moisturise dry skin with this hydrating moisturiser. Ideal for those with dry skin that feels tight, rough or flakey and needs serious moisture. Great for those who want to prevent ageing too.
Soothing Sensitive Skin Cream
Calm and moisturise while healing and alleviating redness with this hydrating moisturiser. Ideal for sensitive, hypersensitive or allergic skin types with skin that reddens or irritates easily.
Balancing Combination Skin Cream
T-zone control! Reduce oil and boost hydration, nourish, repair and protect against signs of ageing with this noncomedogenic moisturiser. Ideal for combination skin to regulate t-zone shine by balancing active, natural, hydrating and oil-absorbing ingredients.
Problematic Skincare Cream
Soothe, hydrate, and prevent clogged pores and blackheads with this oil-free, exfoliating moisturiser. Ideal for those with stubborn acne who want an oil-free moisturiser that won’t clog pores and will help prevent, soothe and heal existing breakouts, including blackheads and pimples.
RS2 Gentle Lotion
Perfect a thorough cleansing, soothe and reduce redness due to rosacea with this alcohol-free toner. For those with hypersensitive skin and microcirculation problems, due to rosacea, who want an alcohol-free toner.
RS2 Care Cream
Repair, moisturise and decongest rosacea skin, to achieve a visibly soothed complexion. For those with hypersensitive skin and microcirculation problems, due to rosacea, who want a hydrating moisturiser.
RS2 Concentrate
This this highly concentrated, lightweight, hydrating serum will calm, cool, soothe, kill bacteria and reduce redness caused by rosacea. For those with hypersensitive skin and microcirculation problems, caused by rosacea, who desire a deep repair treatment.
Timeless Repair Lotion
For dry, mature skin with lines and wrinkles and looseness or sagging that needs a non-drying toner to perfect the cleanse, prepare the skin for further treatment as well hydrate, repair, brighten and reverse signs of ageing.
Timeless Repair Cream
Smooth lines, repair stubborn wrinkles, firm, rejuvenate, brighten, nourish and protect with this highly concentrated, age-defying moisturiser. For dry, mature skin with advanced signs of ageing including lines and wrinkles, loose, sagging skin or those who want one of the most advanced, anti-ageing moisturisers on the market.
Timeless Eye Contour
Smooth crow’s feet, crepiness and puffiness, reduce dark circles, repair sun damage, hydrate and moisturise with this high performance eye cream that truly addresses every eye area concern. For mature skin and those over age 40 with crow’s feet, crepiness, dryness, dehydration, dark circles, and puffiness.
Hydrating Toner
Complete the cleanse, remove tap water impurities, and prevent and repair the first signs of ageing with this alcohol-free toner. For those experiencing the first signs of ageing, dry or dehydrated skin. Also great for those who want to set mineral makeup or need midday hydration.
Marine Collagen Cream
Prevent and smooth fine lines and wrinkles, replenish and nourish, slow down the ageing process, and protect the skin from the environment with this deeply hydrating moisturiser. For those with early signs of ageing, especially fine lines and dry or dehydrated skin. Great for those who want a nice foundation for makeup application.
Micro-Retinol™ Essential Moisturizer
Exceptionally high-performing, this triphase, homogenised, resurfacing and anti-ageing moisturiser penetrates deeply to smooth wrinkles while resurfacing and brightening the skin.
Micro-Retinol™ Essential Serum
Powerfully formulated, this bio-micro-emulsified gel works deep within to smooth wrinkles while visibly lightening and deeply moisturising the skin.
Evolutive Eye Cream
Specifically formulated with botanical extracts, this nourishing and repairing eye cream impressively nourishes and firms the eye contour while softening and smoothing skin texture. Greaseless and firming, it also minimises fine lines whilst offering UV Protection.
Resurfacing Glycocides Cream
Glycolic Acid, Hyaluronic Acid, Sorbitol, Vitamin E and Chamomile, enable this highly smoothing formula to reduce the appearance of fine lines, leaving skin rejuvenated, hydrated and soft. The glycolic acid works to loosen dead cells’ bond preventing epidermal thickening and promoting a gradual daily exfoliation. Smooth’s the skin and reduces the appearance of fine lines. For all skin types, except very sensitive and contains UV protection.
Multi-Active Hand Cream
The perfect daily hand renewal and hydrating moisturiser for rough, dry, calloused hands. Repair, hydrate and smooth callouses with this richly moisturising hand cream. Great for those who do frequent hand-washing. Also provides excellent protection against cold weather.
De-Aging Body Balm – Papaya and Pineapple
This rich and creamy De-Ageing balm is formulated with microemulsified Shea Butter which serves to release Collagen and Elastin polypeptides, Tegospheres with Retinol, Pomegranate extract, anti-ageing tropical fruits extracts within the formula. Used daily the De-Ageing Balm will maintain or restore skin youthfulness, rendering skin nourished and replenished.
After-Sun Soothing Gel
Cool, soothe, reduce redness, heal and prevent sun damage and sensitivity caused by sunburn (and waxing!) with this calming, hydrating gel. For anyone who has a sunburn, had recent sun exposure or red, irritated skin. A must for preventing inflammation, loss of elasticity, and dehydration that UV rays cause. Also great post-waxing services or anytime the skin is irritated.
Which Pevonia in-spa treatments contain Sorbitol?
IN-SPA TREATMENTS 
lumafirm® Eye Contour Lift & Glow Treatment

Visibly smooth’s wrinkles and skin texture
Lifts and firms
Diminishes dark circles and eye puffiness
Lightens and brightens
Repairs sun damage


Rosacea Mask Treatment

An unsurpassed treatment therapy offering a radical solution to skin hypersensitivity
A calming tri-phase, bi-thermal lift-off mask
Immediately relieves skin’s sensitivity, reduces congestion, improves micro-circulation
Seriously addresses skin sensitivity, Rosacea and acne Rosacea
Recommended for symptoms of Rosacea and couperose skin


Skinfit Myoxy-Caviar Mask – For Him

A soft grey peel-off mask
Offers men a de-ageing treatment specifically formulated for their skin
A unique combination of ingredients formulated with the latest technologies
Repairs and nourishes
Strengthens elasticity
Provides immediate radiance
Delivers evident relaxation and smoothing of harsh wrinkles
Recommended for men with visibly ageing skin or as a preventative treatment

Peel & Recapture Micro-Retinol Treatment

A micronised emulsion of Retinol
This brand-exclusive Micro-Retinol technology disperses tiny retinol micro-particles within the skin.
Serves as an expedited delivery system, allowing immediate and easy absorption
Targeted delivery within the deeper epidermal layers, rapidly re-stabilising the skin’s normal function
Considered the skin organiser, retinol works to energise the basal cells and restore their normal activity
De-ages and moisturises
Smooths and resurfaces
Strengthens elasticity
Brightens and lightens
Visibly perfects texture
Recommended for dull, mature, and uneven skin texture

Lumafirm Lift & Glow Treatment

Formulated unlike any other treatment on the market!
This revolutionary micronised freeze-dried treatment transforms into a light emulsion for easy application and amazing penetrability with a powerful combination of the latest in skin repairing and brightening agents: Sorghum Bicolor and Diacetyl Boldine.
Firms and lifts
Lightens and brightens
Refines texture
Repairs, hydrates and protects
Recommended for hyperpigmented, photo-damaged, and loose skin

Lumafirm Body Firm & Glow Treatment

Firming
De-ageing
Wrinkle smoothing
Deeply hydrating
Delivers radiance & glow


These in-spa treatments  are offered at Pevonia spas and salons – find your nearest Pevonia spa/salon HERE.



Leave a Reply Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
Website 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
 

 




For exclusive offers and product updates, sign up to our newsletter. 













 

Youtube









Shopping Bag (0 items)
View Bag




Nothing within basket 




Bag Subtotal: 
£0.00





Secure Checkout
Continue Shopping







Pevonia
Pevonia UK Ltd
Unit 7, Lion Barn Industrial Estate
Needham Market
Suffolk IP6 8RW
+44 (0) 1449 727000
[email protected]



HELP & INFORMATION
Deliveries
FAQs
Returns
Terms & Conditions
Offer Terms & Conditions
Privacy Policy
Contact Us
 

USEFUL LINKS
Discover Pevonia
Blog
Media Library
Our Ingredients
Treatments
 



Payment Information

 






Copyright 2023 Pevonia. All Rights Reserved.
Marketing by Unity Online














































