Document Name: role of Vaseline DAB 8 in Make up Cream4
Document link: https://www.marieclaire.com/beauty/news/a16013/marilyn-monroe-beauty-secrets/






Marilyn Monroe's Beauty Secrets, Straight from Her Makeup Artist Allan Whitey Snyder | Marie Claire
































































































 


































Marie Claire




















Marie Claire








×




Search







 



Fashion




Beauty




Culture




Money & Career




Politics




More





Health & fitness


Celebrity


Food & Cocktails


Travel


Love & Sex


Home


Promo Codes


Subscribe


Shop







logo MCE

















































Trending'Yellowjackets'Mother's DayBeauty LaunchesMet Gala


When you purchase through links on our site, we may earn an affiliate commission. Here’s how it works.











Home


Beauty



8 Beauty Secrets from Marilyn Monroe's Makeup Artist
In Whitey we trust.




  (opens in new tab)



  (opens in new tab)



 



  (opens in new tab)
























(Image credit: Getty)






By Lauren Valenti published 21 September 2015 


Long before the days of Kim Kardashian and Mario Dedivanovic (opens in new tab), there was her most-famous-woman-in-the-world predecessor, Marilyn Monroe, and the man behind her famous visage: Allan "Whitey" Snyder. The pouty red lips. The swooshy lashes. The technicolor-worthy glow. Yes, that was all Whitey, and it wasn't just Monroe he counted among his clientele—Katharine Hepburn, Doris Day, and Raquel Welch were all among his coterie. And if these women trusted Snyder with their million-dollar faces, we want every trick in his book. Here are some of his best-kept secrets, ready for the stealing.1. Use vaseline as a primer and highlighter.While trading in your featherlight moisturizer for petroleum jelly is a perplexing premise, this was always Monroe's base before applying her foundation. She loved it because it was ultimate moisturizer, and to her moisture was the essence of youth. Plus, combined with her signature peach fuzz, it gave her a soft focus glow under the studio lights. Snyder would also use the jelly as a highlighter, applying it to the cheekbones and brow bones for sheen.2. Use five different shades to contour lips.In pursuit of a naturally plumped-up pout, we tried this ourselves (opens in new tab) using Snyder's signature technique: darker reds on the outer corners and lighter shades in the middle to add dimension. Then, we topped things off by using highlighter on the cupid's bow and bottom lip. For an easy step-by-step, see our story here (opens in new tab).(Image credit: Kathryn Wirsing)3. Swipe on a drop of oil for glistening lids.Whether it's a dab of Vaseline or drop of coconut oil, Monroe was a firm believer that shiny lids were sexy. And thus, Snyder would dab some onto her lids for a subtle, wet-look finish.4. Use the Greta Garbo's eyeshadow trick.Monroe literally called it the "Greta Garbo eye," as the silent screen star was the one who originally blended white eye shadow on the lids all the way up to the brow bone and into the inner corners to add more depth.5. Mix a combination of black, brown, white, and red eyeliners.For quick, everyday slashes of eyeliner, most women are either brown or black pencil kinds of girls. But Snyder used a combination of both on Monroe, using Elizabeth Arden's classic eye pencils (opens in new tab) in both hues. He applied liner to her upper lids and waterlines, extending the lash lines with wings to elongate.(Image credit: Getty/Design by Katja Cho)But his most important trick? Sketching out a small white triangle on the outer corner of the eye, in between the top and lower liner wings, to make her eyes look bigger and wider. Additionally, he drew white on the waterlines and put a dot if red liner in the inner corner to make her eyes look even whiter.6. Use blush to contour the nose.While we're well-versed in the art of using blush to contour our faces, it was Whitey who did it first. To shape Monroe's nose, he would tap a little bit of the pinky blush he used to contour her cheeks on the tip of her nose. The results? The illusion of shorter, more defined nose.7. Cut your false eyelashes in half.Monroe wanted her lashes longer and more voluminous with help from fringy falsies, but with natural-looking results. Therefore, Snyder would cut her false eyelash strips in half and apply them only to the outer corners of her eyes.8. Shape your eyebrows with peaks.While eyebrows shape is a very individual characteristic, if you want your arches to channel Monroe's, make like Whitey by drawing in peaks, which Monroe believed helped minimize the wideness of her forehead. But be careful—you don't want them to appear too sharp or pointy.Follow Marie Claire on Instagram for the latest celeb news, pretty pics, funny stuff, and an insider POV. 





Lauren ValentiSocial Links NavigationBeauty EditorLauren is the former beauty editor at Marie Claire. She love to while away the hours at coffee shops, hunt for vintage clothes, and bask in the rough-and-tumble beauty of NYC. She firmly believes that solitude can be a luxury if you’ve got the right soundtrack—that being the Rolling Stones, of course.

Latest























I'm Crazy About Quiet Luxury—Banana Republic's Huge Sale Includes These 10 Must-Have Basics


Save hundreds on items that'll last a lifetime.


By Gabrielle Ulubay















Prince Harry "Has Still Not Been Told Where He's Sitting" at the Coronation as the Big Day Draws Nearer, Source Says


But he probably won't be relegated to the 10th row, apparently.


By Iris Goldsztajn















Kim Kardashian Said She'd Happily Trade Reality TV for Being an "Attorney Full Time"


Love that for her.


By Iris Goldsztajn









You might also like























The 20 Best Hair Masks for Damaged Hair, According to Experts and Editors


Healthy strands, here we come!


By Gabrielle Ulubay















How Often You Should Wash Your Hair, According To Experts


Keep it fresh, my friends.


By Gabrielle Ulubay















The 11 Best Magnetic Lashes of 2023


Go ahead and kiss your messy lash glue goodbye.


By Hana Hong















The 25 Best Hair Growth Shampoos of 2023, According to Experts


Rapunzel-like hair, coming right up.


By Gabrielle Ulubay
















The 23 Best Beauty Advent Calendars of 2023


The gift that keeps on giving—literally.


By Julia Marzovilla















The 18 Best Natural Hair Products in 2023


Remember: Your curls are your crown.


By Gabrielle Ulubay















The 9 Best Hot Rollers for the Curls of Your Dreams


This is how we roll.


By Samantha Holender















The 12 Best Cream Eyeshadows, According to Makeup Artists


The best part? They’re so easy to apply.


By Samantha Holender







View More ▸












Marie Claire





















About us (opens in new tab)
Contact Future's experts (opens in new tab)
Contact us (opens in new tab)
Advertise Online (opens in new tab)
Newsletter (opens in new tab)
Terms and conditions (opens in new tab)
Privacy policy (opens in new tab)
Cookies policy (opens in new tab)
Careers (opens in new tab)


Marie Claire is part of Future plc, an international media group and leading digital publisher.  Visit our corporate site.
©
Future US, Inc. Full 7th Floor, 130 West 42nd Street,
New York,
NY 10036. 















