Document Name: role of Vaseline DAB 8 in Make up Cream1
Document link: https://www.vaseline.com/us/en/articles/ingredients/eight-game-changing-hacks-you-didn-t-know-you-could-do-with-vase.html




  


8 Game-Changing Hacks You Can Do With Vaseline® | Vaseline® 



































































Skip to content








FAQ  
Get in Touch  
Sign up to our Newsletter  









Get































           Idioma: 
         




Español























 


Products

 
 


Articles

 
 


About Vaseline

 
 


Skin Health for All

 
 


Where to Buy

 










 Explore All Products






  By Category 

 Healing Jelly
 Lotions & Moisturizers 
 Lip Care 
 Hand Care
 Gels & Body Butters
 Men 
 






  By Skin Concern

 Dry Skin
 Extremely Dry Skin
 Sensitive Skin 
 Minor Cuts and Scrapes
 Eczema
 Dehydrated Skin
 Others..
 






  By Ingredients

 Cocoa Butter
 Shea Butter
 Aloe Vera 
 Hyaluronic Acid
 Vitamins
 Healing Jelly 
 Others..
 


















Vaseline® Sensitive Skin Relief Lotion






People are loving















 Explore All Articles






 Skin Concerns

 Dry Skin
 Extremely Dry Skin 
 Sensitive Skin
 Eczema or Psoriasis
 Itchy Skin
 Others..
 






 Skincare Basics

 How-Tos
 Tricks and Tips 
 Skin Explained
 Slugging
 






 Ingredients

 Cocoa Butter
 Aloe Vera 
 Vitamins
 Healing Jelly 
 Others..
 


















Slugging with Vaseline® Original Healing Jelly






All you need to know



























Mission





















History





















Ingredients





















Sustainability

















Skin Health for All  














Where to Buy  












 Search  
 go 











Signup








 Home  
 All Articles  
 Ingredients  
 Hacks You Didn't Know You Could Do With Vaseline®






















8 Game-Changing Hacks You Didn't Know You Could Do With Vaseline
2 min read
















Your lips won't mind if you share the love with other parts of your face.
If you're anything like us, you've always got a tube or tin of Vaseline hanging out at the bottom of every purse (we like to think they're best buds with all the bobby pins and lipsticks floating around down there) and a quickly depleting jar sitting in your medicine cabinet or right on your sink. But did you know you can use it for so much more than just chapped lips? Check out these so-simple, expert-approved beauty hacks to try with Vaseline.
Use it as highlighter. When Kim Kardashian's makeup artist, Mario Dedivanovic, wants to create what he calls "expensive skin," ironically, he uses this very affordable petroleum jelly. "I pat it right along the cheekbones, which gives you the most alluring, gorgeous glow," he told Page Six.
Make your eye shadow brighter. Spread a very small amount of Vaseline on your lids before applying your eye shadow as you normally would and behold — the color looks so much more rich and vibrant. "It really does the trick," says Allure digital beauty reporter Devon Abelman, who cautions against a thick layer unless you're going for a glossy look.
Remove your eye makeup. Not only can you use Vaseline before applying eye shadow, but you can also use the jelly to remove it — and eyeliner and mascara — in one of the gentlest ways available. "It's light and lubricated, so the makeup slides right off without harming the skin," dermatologist Mona Gohara told Allure.
Calm down cystic acne. It may be scary to apply something sorta greasy to breakout-prone skin, but Vaseline "may actually help maintain healthy skin-barrier function, as the skin is inflamed," according to dermatologist Joshua Zeichner, who says that cosmetic-grade petroleum jelly should not clog your pores. Try it as the last layer in your nighttime skin-care routine to help seal in the ingredients of your clarifying products.
Moisturize under your eyes. After you're done dabbing Vaseline on any zits, sweep a layer under your eyes, too. Dermatologist Michele Green told Allure that petrolatum locks in moisture so that by morning, dryness has disappeared.
Keep a manicure clean. Apply Vaseline to the skin around your nails before you start painting as a way to catch stray polish. Once your manicure is dry, you can simply wipe away any smudges without remover.
Extend the life of your perfume. A dab of Vaseline on your wrists and neck can work like a fragrance primer, cosmetic chemist Ron Robinson says, because it prevents scent molecules from evaporating as quickly as they would on bare skin.
Bulk up your brows. Can't find your brow gel or pomade? Smooth a little Vaseline over your eyebrows to not only keep them in place all day but make them look longer and thicker without any added color.
You can pick up a 13-ounce tub of Vaseline pretty much anywhere for about $4
Source: 8 Game-Changing Hacks You Didn't Know You Could Do With Vaseline – Allure.com, 3/22/19 












Tags
Healing Jelly






Related Articles



How to Get Healthy-looking, Beautiful Skin





             Healthy Skin Tips For Every Skin Type 
           
Read More How to Get Healthy-looking, Beautiful Skin » 
 


What is the Glass Skin Trend and How Achievable Is It? | Vaseline®





             The glass skin trend has taken the social media world by storm. What exactly is this trend and how can you achieve it? 
           
Read More What is the Glass Skin Trend and How Achievable Is It? | Vaseline® » 
 


Dealing with Dry, Itchy Skin on Legs





             <div>Dry legs itch, flake & aggravate - but these dry skin remedies can help.</div><div><b> </b></div> 
           
Read More Dealing with Dry, Itchy Skin on Legs » 
 


A Skin Care Regimen Can Improve Quality Of Life





             Are you suffering from dry, itchy skin? To solve this problem you need moisturizing products like Vaseline® Intensive Care™. 
           
Read More A Skin Care Regimen Can Improve Quality Of Life » 
 









Share This Article






 Share to facebook Opens in new window 
 Share to twitter Opens in new window 
 Share to email Opens in new window 



AddThis is disabled because of cookie consent




















Related Products




















              theme-border-yellow 
            
















Vaseline® Healing Jelly Original















BUY NOW























              theme-border-brown 
            
















Vaseline® Healing Jelly Cocoa Butter















BUY NOW























              theme-border-brown 
            
















Vaseline® Cocoa Shimmer Jelly Stick















BUY NOW























              theme-border-green 
            
















Vaseline® Refreshing Body Balm Jelly Stick















BUY NOW























              theme-border-yellow 
            
















Vaseline® All-Over Body Balm Jelly Stick















BUY NOW













































EQUITABLE SKINCARE FOR ALL
Every body, Everywhere Deserves Healthy Skin






Systemic racism and healthcare inequities negatively impact Black and Latinx communities, leading to worse health outcomes for people of color, and skincare is no exception. We want to change that.
Learn MorE About SHA 















Back to Top








Page footer












Explore








All Products  
All Articles  
Skin Health for All  












Help








Where to Buy  
Get in Touch  





Live Chat







FAQ  












Legal








Site Map  





Accessibility




Terms of Use




Privacy Notice




Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information





















Sign up for healthy skin. Stay updated, get exclusive Vaseline® offers, inspiration, and more. 












 Your Email * 








 Continue 








 call us 1-800-234-567 





Keep in Touch 








Facebook




Twitter




Instagram




YouTube


































© 2023 Unilever. All rights reserved. This website is directed only to U.S. consumers for products and services of Unilever United States. This website is not directed to consumers outside of the U.S. 











Country Selector

 Brazil (PT) 
 Canada (EN) 
 Canada (FR) 
 India (EN) 
 Indonesia (ID) 
 Malaysia (EN) 
 Netherlands (NL) 
 South Africa (EN) 
 Thailand (TH) 
 United Arab Emirates (EN) 
 United States (EN) 
 United States (ES) 


















