Document Name: role of Vaseline DAB 8 in Make up Cream3
Document link: https://www.webmd.com/skin-problems-and-treatments/ss/slideshow-petroleum-jelly-uses




Health Benefits and Uses of Petroleum Jelly
















































 Skip to main content  Home  Conditions  Back Conditions View All  ADD/ADHD  Allergies  Arthritis  Atrial fibrillation  Breast Cancer  Cancer  Crohn's Disease  Depression  Diabetes  DVT  Eczema  Eye Health  Heart Disease  HIV & AIDS  Lung Disease  Lupus  Mental Health  Multiple Sclerosis  Migraine  Pain Management  Psoriasis  Psoriatic Arthritis  Rheumatoid Arthritis  Sexual Conditions  Skin Problems  Sleep Disorders  Ulcerative Colitis  View All  Drugs & Supplements  Back Drugs & Supplements Drugs  Supplements  Pill Identifier  Interaction Checker  Well-Being  Back Well-Being View All  Aging Well  Baby  Birth Control  Children's Health  Diet & Weight Management  Fitness & Exercise  Food & Recipes  Healthy Beauty  Men's Health  Parenting  Pet Health  Pregnancy  Sex & Relationships  Teen Health  Women's Health  View All  Symptom Checker  Find a Doctor  More  Back More News  Blogs  Podcasts  Webinars  Newsletters  WebMD Magazine  Best Hospitals  Support Groups  Surgeries and Procedures  Orthopedics  Privacy & More  Subscribe  Log In  Search  Subscribe Skin Problems and TreatmentsSlideshowsPetroleum Jelly: Health Benefits and Uses Medically Reviewed by  Stephanie S. Gardner, MD   on November 03, 2021  Helps Wounds Heal 1/17 Petroleum jelly hit the market almost 150 years ago. It’s still a favorite of dermatologists. That’s because it seals water into your skin. That’s good for your wounds because they need a moist place to heal. It may take up to twice as long for dry injured skin to get better. This oily moisturizer may also ease the redness of a new scar and lower your chances of infection. It also won’t burn when you put it on.  Relief for Eczema and Psoriasis 2/17 With some conditions, your skin may have a hard time keeping water in and bad stuff out. If it’s really dry, it could crack and let in bacteria. Petroleum jelly may help your skin and the medicines you take work better. It can ease inflammation and keep your skin moist. This can help you itch and scratch less.To get the most out of your petroleum jelly, use it on your skin when it’s damp. Help for Atopic Dermatitis in Babies 3/17 Petroleum jelly can relieve itchy skin in newborns and infants. If atopic dermatitis (eczema) runs in your family, petroleum jelly may be a low-cost way to help your child avoid it. You can start to use it on your baby’s skin about 3 weeks after they’re born. It Can Kill Mature Lice, but Not the Eggs 4/17 Like mayonnaise, petroleum jelly is a home remedy for lice. Research shows it may kill adult lice. But it doesn’t keep the eggs, known as nits, from hatching. That means it’s not a good way to control lice. Instead, you should use a medicine that’s made to kill lice, called a pediculicide. Blister Prevention 5/17 Before you head out for a run, rub some petroleum jelly between your legs or on your heels. It may keep you from chafing in areas that rub together. If you do get a blister, petroleum jelly on your sore can help it heal. Diaper Rash Relief 6/17 Petroleum jelly protects the skin from outside stuff. That includes your baby's poop and pee. You can use it between diaper changes if your baby gets a rash.  Dermatologists like it because there are no fragrances or preservatives. That’s good for babies' butts and parents' hands.  And there’s no evidence that costly diaper rash creams work better than petroleum jelly. But that doesn’t mean you have to toss them. If you like the way a cream smells or feels, keep using it. Hemorrhoid Help 7/17 Petroleum jelly may help you feel better if you have a hemorrhoid flare. You can add a layer inside your anal area to protect your sensitive skin. This may make it more comfortable to poop. You may itch and hurt less, too. Windburn Prevention 8/17 Petroleum jelly can protect your skin against wind and cold. Just rub a thin layer on any area that might get exposed to the air. You can also dab a little under your runny nose if it gets dry. But you may want to avoid areas that are acne-prone. Petroleum jelly can trap bacteria and oil in your skin. That can make your breakouts worse. Eye Moisturizer 9/17 The skin around your eyes is really thin. This means it can get bothered easily. A layer of petroleum jelly can give your eyelids some added moisture. It’s also a safe way to remove eye makeup. But try not to get any inside your eye. It’s not likely to cause an allergic reaction, but it could add bacteria.     Protection for Your Pet’s Paws 10/17 Rub a little petroleum jelly on your dog’s paw pads before you take them out for a winter walk. It can protect their feet from the cold and from salt on the sidewalks. This oily layer can also moisturize your pet’s skin if they have atopic dermatitis. Nail Moisturizer 11/17 You don’t need costly creams to keep your nails in good shape. Petroleum jelly can hydrate all parts of your hands. If your nails are brittle, it can help fill in and smooth out some of the ridges and rough spots. If you get manicures a lot, you may want to dab some on after your next session. But make sure your nails are still a little damp first to seal in the water. How to Avoid Greasiness 12/17 A little petroleum jelly goes a long way. But if you don’t want it on your fingers at all, use a small spatula to put on a thin layer wherever you want to use it. If you moisturize your hands or feet, just put on gloves or socks after. But keep in mind that oil-based products may stain fabric or carpet. Can You Use It With Oxygen Therapy? 13/17 Some experts think you shouldn't use petroleum jelly while you’re on oxygen therapy because there’s a small chance the combo could start a fire if there's a spark. But there’s no evidence that this happens a lot. There’s another reason you may want to avoid using an oil-based moisturizer in your nose. It’s rare, but petroleum jelly could hurt your lungs. To be safe, try a water-based option instead. Don’t Put It on Your New Sunburn 14/17 Oil-based products can keep heat inside your skin. If your skin is burned, it’s better to use aloe vera or soy-based products on it. And you’ll probably peel after a sunburn no matter what moisturizer you use. That’s because ultraviolet rays from the sun hurt the cells in your skin. A moisturizer can’t undo the damage. But it may help you heal faster and make your peeling less visible.  Don’t Eat It 15/17 In large doses, petroleum jelly can give you diarrhea or stomach cramps. It may make you throw up. Keep it away from kids and pets. You don’t need to worry if they get a little in their mouth. But if they can’t swallow or they cough a lot, call the poison control center at 800-222-1222. Don’t Use It for Sex 16/17 It’s a bad idea to use petroleum jelly when you have sex. It could cause latex condoms to break. If you’re female, it might raise your chances of getting bacterial vaginosis. Try a water-based option instead. There Are Natural Oil-Based Options 17/17 Petroleum jelly comes from a fossil fuel. If you’d like a natural choice, try pure shea butter, cocoa butter, or cold-pressed coconut oil. They may not stay on as well, but they’ll keep your skin moist. Show Sources IMAGES PROVIDED BY:1)            defun /Getty Images2)            Ranee Sornprasitt / Getty Images3)            panida wijitpanya / Getty Images4)            kozorog / Getty Images5)            Gajus / Getty Images6)            Rayes / Getty Images7)            Science Source8)            julief514 / Getty Images9)            MangoStar_Studio / Getty Images10)          Binikins / Getty Images11)          AaronAmat / Getty Images12)          Delpixart / Getty Images13)          Toa55 / Getty Images14)          mescioglu / Getty Images15)          lenshiker / Getty Images16)          Graphyrider / Getty Images17)          S847 / Getty Images SOURCES:Steve Xu, MD, dermatologist; instructor, Northwestern Medicine Feinberg School of Medicine.Google Patents: “Improvement in products from petroleum.”The Journal of Clinical Investigation: “Skin care in the aging female: myths and truths.”Indian Journal of Dermatology: "Moisturizers: The Slippery Road."The Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology: “Petrolatum: Barrier repair and antimicrobial responses underlying this 'inert' moisturizer.”Indian Dermatology Online Journal: “Topical Therapies in Psoriasis.”Seminars in Plastic Surgery: Update on Postsurgical Scar Management.”JAMA Pediatrics: “Cost-effectiveness of Prophylactic Moisturization for Atopic Dermatitis.”American Academy of Pediatrics: “Head Lice.”The Journal of Pediatric Nurses: “Home remedies to control head lice: assessment of home remedies to control the human head louse, Pediculus humanus capitis (Anoplura: Pediculidawe).”CDC: “Parasites: Treatment.”American Academy of Dermatology: “How to prevent and treat blisters,” “5 ways to use petroleum jelly for skin care,” “Treating sunburn.” Harvard Health Publishing: “Hemorrhoids.”Cleveland Clinic: “Top 6 Winter Health Hazards and How to Beat Them.”American Academy of Ophthalmology: “How To Use Cosmetics Safely Around Your Eyes,” “Can petroleum jelly (Vaseline) be put into an eye that was scratched by being poked with paper?”University of Illinois Extension: “Stain Solutions: Petroleum Jelly.” The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center: “Oxygen Safety in the Hospital.”American Lung Association: “Using Oxygen Safely.”University of Chicago Medicine, Comer Children’s: “Caring for Your Child on Oxygen.”Mayo Clinic: “Petroleum jelly: Safe for a dry nose?”International Journal of Clinical Pharmacy: “Safety in the use of Vaseline during oxygen therapy: the pharmacist’s perspective.”Northern New England Poison Center: “Petroleum Jelly (Vaseline, Aquaphor)."Obstetrics and Gynecology: “Intravaginal practices and risk of bacterial vaginosis and candidiasis infection among a cohort of women in the United States.”Journal of Applied Sciences: "A Review on Petroleum: Source, Uses, Processing, Products and the Environment."
  © 2021 WebMD, LLC. All rights reserved.  View privacy policy and trust info Top PicksHealth Solutions from Our Sponsors Penis Curved When Erect?  Could I have CAD?  Treat Bent Fingers  Treat HR+, HER2- MBC  Tired of Dandruff?  Benefits of CBD  Rethink MS Treatment  AFib-Related Strokes  Risk of a Future DVT/PE  Is My Penis Normal?  Relapsing MS Options  Liver Transplants Save Lives  Finance Plastic Surgery  Bent Finger Causes  Living With Psoriasis?  Missing Teeth? More from WebMD 5 Tips to Help With Relapsing MS  How to Thrive With Narcolepsy  Relief for Blocked Hair Follicles  Psoriatic Arthritis and Your Sleep  What Psoriasis Feels Like  First Psoriatic Arthritis Flare  Talking to Your Doctor About RA  Crohn's: A 'Full-Body' Disease  Avoiding Crohn’s Flares  Health Benefits of Hemp Seed Oil  Live Better With Psoriatic Disease  Types of B-Cell Therapy for MS  5 Health Benefits of Hemp  Why Prostate Cancer Spreads  Living with Advanced Breast Cancer  Where Breast Cancer Spreads Policies Privacy Policy  Cookie Policy  Editorial Policy  Advertising Policy  Correction Policy  Terms of Use About Contact Us  About WebMD  Careers  Newsletter  Corporate  WebMD Health Services  Site Map  Accessibility Our Apps WebMD Mobile  WebMD App  Pregnancy  Baby  Allergy For Advertisers Advertise with Us  Advertising Policy  Visit WebMD on Facebook  Visit WebMD on Twitter  Visit WebMD on Pinterest  © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, an  Internet Brands  company. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.  See additional information. 







