Document Name: role of Amphisol K in Protective Cream3
Document link: https://www.robinsonsremedies.com/product/skin-repair/








Skin Repair | Robinson's Remedies



























































































 













 
Menu
Home
Wind Musicians’ Shop

NEW! Reed Renew
Wax-Free Lip Renew Recovery
Lip Renew Endurance Cream
Products We Like


Lips & Skin Shop

NEW!! Lip Quench
NEW! Skin Repair Anti-Viral Skin Cream
Lip Repair Anti-Viral Cream for Lips


Merch Store
About Us

Blog
Meet Ken Robinson
Meet Walter White
Meet Our Endorsers
Our Values
Find Your Retailer


Contact
Home
Shop

Lip Renew Recovery
Lip Renew Endurance Cream
Lip Repair Anti-Viral Cream for Lips


Blog
About Us

Meet Ken Robinson
Our Values
Endorsers
Find Your Retailer


Contact
My Account
 
 
My Account
 
 
Robinson's RemediesWorld's finest all natural lip care for professionals 
 


$0.00 0 items



 


Home / Lips & Skin / Skin Repair 









 





$19.99
213 in stock


Skin Repair quantity


Add to cart

Skin Repair
Skin Repair is back in stock!!
Robinson’s Remedies Skin Repair moisturizes, soothes, and protects your skin without that annoying greasy feeling.
Our proprietary concentrated formula starts with virgin coconut oil and glycerin. Enhanced with five essential oils to help relieve skin irritations, cuts, bruises, and rashes, Skin Repair will leave your skin silky smooth and deeply hydrated. Powerful anti-viral ingredients supported by St. John’s Wort and Arnica soothe your skin and provide an extra measure of protection after washing against viruses and bacteria.
We invite you to have a look at our ingredients and their purpose as shown below. We pride ourselves on producing highly effective products based on a proprietary combination of ingredients that work incredibly well. And note what we DON’T use. There is no wax, petrolatum, paraffin or any ingredient that will impair the absorption of our ingredients.
Robinson’s Remedies Skin Repair. Your skin deserves nothing less.
Made in the USA. 2 oz./ 60ml.
 




						Ingredients and Purpose 					



						The Skin Repair Story					



						Testimonials					



Ingredients and Purpose Arnica Oil: Arnica has anti-inflammatory and antibacterial properties. Known for its ability to soothe the skin, it can decrease the healing time for inflamed bruising on your skin.
AMP: works to neutralize other acidic ingredients and helps to keep the formula stable. 
Behenyl Alcohol (Docosanol): An FDA approved food preservative with strong anti-viral/microbial/bacterial properties. It is the active ingredient in popular cold sore remedies.
Benzyl Alcohol: A bacteriostatic preservative.
Ethylhexlglycerin: Ethylhexylglycerin is a skin conditioning agent, helping to improve the appearance of the skin but also has beneficial anti-microbial, and preservative effects.
Cetearyl alcohol: Helps to soften and soothe the skin.
Glycerin: Glycerin is great for the skin because it acts as a humectant, which is a substance that allows the skin to retain moisture. It can increase skin hydration, relieve dryness, and refresh the skin’s surface.
 Heliofeel ™: A stabilizer and emulsifier for our product. Heliofeel is a trademark of Lucas-Meyer Cosmetics. 
Lavender essential oil: Provides excellent soothing relief to the skin. 
MPC: A whey protein that serves as an ingredient to help remove wrinkles, stimulate collagen production and help to heal minor skin irritations.
Oat Oil: Helps to nourish and soothe maturing, sensitive and damaged skin, and it improves the elasticity of the skin and hair. It is rich in biologically active components such as tocopherols, phytosterols, phospholipids, and essential fatty acids such as Omega-6 and Omega-9.
Peppermint essential oil: Helps to reduce skin irritation and inflammation while providing antiseptic and anti-bacterial properties. 
Potassium Cetyl Phosphate/Amphisol K: A stabilizer and emulsifier for our product.
Red Raspberry seed oil: Rich in anti-oxidants, a source of vitamins A & E, this ingredient helps to reduce stress and inflammation of the skin. It is also an excellent source of phytosterosis which helps the skin retain moisture. 
Rosemary essential oil: It deeply hydrates skin, aids in controlling sebum production. It has anti-bacterial and anti-inflammatory properties to help prevent skin irritations such as acne. 
St. John’s Wort oil: Helps to increase skin elasticity and hydration, reduce inflammation, and ease pain caused by common ailments. It  can speed up the healing process of burns, bruises, and scars as the oil aids the skin’s cell regeneration process and stimulates the circulation of oxygenated blood to damaged cells. It’s anti-inflammatory agent also reduces redness and inflammation. 
Ultrez 21: A thickener and formula stabilizing agent.
Virgin Coconut Oil: An excellent natural skin moisturizer that helps to reduce inflammation, promotes wound healing, and has anti-viral, anti-fungal, and anti-bacterial properties. 
Vitamin E: Rich in antioxidants, vitamin E is an excellent natural anti-inflammatory ingredient. 
Water: The ultimate moisturizer!
 

The Skin Repair StorySkin Repair has been under development since the earliest days of our company. After Kenny developed Lip Repair to help prevent and treat cold sores, several of his friends had asked him to develop a skin cream that would help treat skin irritations such as insect bites, poison ivy, and swimmer’s (lake) itch. These are common skin irritations for people living in the cottage country of Northern Michigan. And so, Kenny collaborated with our professional formulators at the US Botanical Safety Laboratory in North Carolina to develop a skin cream based on the formula in Lip Repair.
Kenny’s friends tested prototypes and loved how effectively they worked. And as he proceeded to reformulate Lip Repair to enhance its effectiveness, Skin Repair was modified accordingly.
We believe the time is right to introduce Skin Repair to you! This is especially true during the global COVID-19 pandemic when people are looking for ways of mitigating the risk of infection. While there is no scientific evidence to prove that Skin Repair will inhibit the COVID-19 virus specifically, we believe that every bit helps. Frequent hand washing and/or using hand sanitizer can dry the skin. Skin Repair helps to rehydrate the skin while soothing any irritations and giving you that extra measure of protection.
 

Testimonials 



 Lip Quench ®


 Lip Repair Anti-Viral Cream for Lips











View robinsonsremedies’s profile on FacebookView LipRepair’s profile on TwitterView robinsons_remedies’s profile on InstagramView UCZx8d_TA2SoacCc41mmORHA’s profile on YouTubeSign up for our newsletter and get exclusive discounts and advanced news!

© Robinson's Remedies 2022

Terms and Conditions
 




My Account 

Cart				0









 
You're viewing: Skin Repair
$19.99


							Add to cart						






 



Join our newsletter!
and be the first to find out about special savings
SUBSCRIBE
Get 15% off your next order
with a minimum $30 purchase
Check your inbox shortly for a code



Did you know we have flash sales? And our next one is right around the corner. Sign up for our newsletter to learn all about it. Dismiss














































































