Document Name: role of DL Panthenol in Protective Cream3
Document link: https://incidecoder.com/ingredients/panthenol






Panthenol (Explained + Products)




















































Products
Ingredients
Decode INCI
Login

Register







Login

Register





Products
Ingredients
Decode INCI



 


Follow us on our new Insta page »


























                        Panthenol
                    
goodie

Also-called-like-this:  Pro-Vitamin B5

What-it-does: 

soothing, 
                        
                            moisturizer/humectant



Irritancy: 
 0



Comedogenicity: 
  0 






Official CosIng Information

All Functions: antistatic, hair conditioning, skin conditioning
                    CAS #: 81-13-0 / 16485-10-2
                     | EC #: 201-327-3 / 240-540-6
                    Ph. Eur. Name: Dexpanthenolum
                     | Chemical/IUPAC Name: Butanamide, 2,4-Dihydroxy-N-(3-Hydroxypropyl)-3,3-Dimethyl-, (2R)-; Dl-Panthenol
                    

Details





An easy-to-formulate, commonly used, nice to have ingredient that’s also called pro-vitamin B5. As you might guess from the “pro” part, it’s a precursor to vitamin B5 (whose fancy name is pantothenic acid). 
Its main job in skincare products is to moisturise the skin. It’s a humectant meaning that it can help the skin to attract water and then hold onto it. There is also research showing that panthenol can help our skin to produce more lovely lipids that are important for a strong and healthy skin barrier. 
Another great thing about panthenol is that it has anti-inflammatory and skin protecting abilities. A study shows that it can reduce the irritation caused by less-nice other ingredients (e.g. fragrance, preservatives or chemical sunscreens) in the product.
Research also shows that it might be useful for wound healing as it promotes fibroblast (nice type of cells in our skin that produce skin-firming collagen) proliferation. 
If that wasn’t enough panthenol is also useful in nail and hair care products. A study shows that a nail treatment liquide with 2% panthenol could effectively get into the nail and significantly increase the hydration of it.
As for the hair the hydration effect is also true there. Panthenol might make your hair softer, more elastic and helps to comb your hair more easily. 


[more]
[more]
[less]




Something incorrect or missing? Let us know!



Show me some proof




                            Proksch, Ehrhardt, et al. "Topical use of dexpanthenol: a 70th anniversary article." Journal of Dermatological Treatment 28.8 (2017): 766-773.
                        

                            International Journal of Cosmetic Science, Volume 29 (4) –  Aug  1, 2007, In vitro human nail penetration and kinetics of panthenol
                        

                            Journal of cosmetic science., 2011 Jul-Aug;62(4):361-70., Skin moisturizing effects of panthenol-based formulations. 
                        

                            Clinics in Dermatology, Volume 27 (5)  – Sep  1, 2009, Common cosmeceuticals
                        


[more]
[more]
[less]



Products with a known amount of Panthenol
























            30.0% | B5 D-Panthenol Ampoule
        

            COSRX
        
















            10.0% | Panthenol Intensive Hydrating Serum
        

            Dr.magic
        
















            10.0% | Deep Sea Waterfall Ampoule
        

            Lirikos Marine Energy
        
















            10.0% | Panthenol 10 Moisture Skin
        

            Truecare
        
















            10.0% | Panthenol 10 Moisture Skin
        

            Truecare
        
















            8.0% | Intensive Hydrating Concentrate
        

            dermistry⁺
        
















            5.0% | Soon Jung  5-Panthensoside Cica Balm
        

            Etude House
        
















            3.0% | Cica Intensive Repair Serum
        

            Dr.magic
        





















Other products with Panthenol


Bepanthen Wound And Healing Ointment
Bepanthol Bepantriz Dexpantenol
Bimex Panthenol Nano Bạc
Cremorlab SKIN RENEWAL Toner T.e.n. Cremor
Genom Dermon Creme
GoodnDoc Hydrat B5
KAMINOMOTO Hair Tonic Gold
Kalahari Alpha Lipoic Complex With Astaxanthin
MBK Clinical Skincare Solutions B5 Serum
Melano Pharma Melanthenol Cream
Nard Deep Moisture Cream
Needs Face Creme Demaquilante
Parkville Pharmaceuticals Shaan Rejuvenation Cream
Smooth É Extra Intensive Formula Hair Serum
Vano Vano Cream
1004 Laboratory ATVT Panthenol V-Shield Cream
1004 Laboratory ATVT Panthenol V-Shield Skin Toner
2Sol Cica Youth Toner
A'pieu Bad Vita Cream
A'pieu pH Balancing 18 Moisture Cream
AA Cera Wrażliwa Krem Intensywnie Nawilżający
Ada tina Nutribalm Lipid Replenish
Aiken Prebiotic Hydra Serum
Alcina Style Schutzschild Heat Protection Spray
Anaplasis Eye Serum Puffiness & Dark Circles
Andalou Naturals Brightening Clementine + C Illuminating Toner
Answer19 Cica Panthenol Ampoule
Answer19 Cica Panthenol Cream
Answer19 Cica Panthenol Mist
Apolosophy Active+ Vitamin C Serum
Atopalm Panthenol Cream
Atopalm Panthenol Cream
Atopalm Soothing Gel Lotion
Ausceuticals Retinol Serum
Ausceuticals Retinol Serum (Reformulated And Now In Airless Packaging)
Avoskin Your Skin Bae Panthenol 5% + Mugwort + Cica Serum
B. Skincare Hydrating Face Mist
BABOR Retinol Smoothing Toner
BANOBAGI Vita Genic Jelly Mask Cica
BANOBAGI Vita Genic Jelly Mask Pore Tightening
BANOBAGI Vita Genic Jelly Mask Vitalizing
BOGNA SKIN Rose Tonic “The Wild Rose”
Bakel Q10-B5 S.O.S. Sensitive Skin
Balea Med Ultra Sensitive Fusscreme
Balea Med Ultra Sensitive Panthenol Körperbalsam
Bassa Toner
Bayer Bepanthol Face Cream
Bayer Bepanthol Face Cream Moisturization & Regeneration Daily Care
Be Minimalist Vitamin B5 10% Moisturizer
Be Minimalist Vitamin B5 Moisturizer

Next page >>









                        We do a Best of INCIDecoder email once a month with the most interesting products and ingredients we bump into.

                        
                            




An error has occurred. Please try again later!


Click below to subscribe:




        Thanks. :)  You are almost done: please check your mailbox to confirm your email!
    







                    *INCI is a list of the standardized and internationally accepted names used in the declaration of ingredients on cosmetic and personal care products. It is published by the Personal Care Product Council.
                

                    Copyright 2023 | About


 







