Document Name: role of DL Panthenol in Protective Cream4
Document link: https://www.paulaschoice-eu.com/panthenol-for-skin-and-hair





  










What Does Panthenol Do for Skin and Hair? | Paula's Choice









































































Choose your location

It looks like you’re in the wrong place. Shop your local website.

Stay here
GO TO LOCAL WEBSITE








 
 Spring refresh: up to 20% off


 
Free delivery on all orders over € 150

 
 Free travel kit when you purchase any 3 full-sizes










Menu




Close Search




Search Catalog


Search







Back to Homepage







0








Shop

skincare







By routine step












Step 1 Cleansers









Step 2 Toners









Step 3 Exfoliants








Step 4 Treatments







Treatments






Serums






Boosters






Masks






Eye products







Step 5 Moisturisers







Day moisturisers






Night moisturisers






Make-up






Lip products






Bodycare






 
New mini combos! Perfect to try out or travel

 
Find your routine in just 3 clicks







By skin concern










Acne-prone skin






Breakouts






Blackheads






Anti-ageing






Dull skin






Keratosis pilaris






Brown spots






Redness






Sensitive skin






Very dry skin






Enlarged pores






Rosacea-prone skin






See all concerns






 
New: Sensitive skin & redness? CALM to the rescue
 
 
Antioxidants for better sun protection







By ingredient










Retinol






SPF






Vitamin C






Peptides






BHA Salicylic acid






AHA Glycolic acid






Ceramides






Hyaluronic acid






Niacinamide






Omega fatty acids






Bakuchiol






See all ingredients






 
New: 5% Niacinamide Body Serum

 
New: C5 Super Boost Moisturiser & Eye Cream





























Beautypedia







Articles & education










Acne & breakouts






Anti-Ageing & wrinkles






Basic skincare






Bodycare






Dry skin






Exfoliants






Eye care






Ingredient spotlight






Make-up






Men's skincare






Oily & Combination skincare






Brown spots






Redness & rosacea-prone skin






Sensitive skin






Sun care






The beginner's guides





See all categories







E-Courses










Acne E-course






Blackheads E-course






Hyperpigmentation E-course






Routines E-course

















          Membership
 




Contact Us








Mother's Day gift sets
Bestsellers
New products
Skincare sets
Travel sizes
Power duos


Don't miss out


Up to 20% off + a free gift 


Gifts: free beauty headband + three minis 











Log in






Hello there,



Log in

or




Sign up










My Wish List




My orders




My details




My address






Contact Us











Your browser's Javascript functionality is turned off. Please turn it on so that you can experience the full capabilities of this site.








Paula's Choice




Articles & education




Ingredient spotlight





What Does Panthenol Do for Skin and Hair?









What Does Panthenol Do for Skin and Hair?


Panthenol is an often-overlooked beauty hero with loads of research backing its ability to improve skin’s barrier strength and hydration, among other benefits. We’ll explain exactly what it is, why it works so well, what benefits you can expect to see, and how to incorporate it into your self-care routine.
The original version of this article was reviewed by Dr Corey L. Hartman, MD, USA
In this article:

What is panthenol?
What is panthenol in skincare?
What skin type is panthenol good for?
What does panthenol do for skin?
Is panthenol the same as hyaluronic acid?
Is panthenol safe?
Is panthenol safe during pregnancy?
How to use panthenol for skin
Can panthenol be used with vitamin C, retinol, or other active ingredients?
Can panthenol cause acne?
Does panthenol clog pores?
Is panthenol good for hair?
How to use panthenol for hair


What is panthenol?
Panthenol (often referred to as pro-vitamin B5) is a substance derived from the B vitamin pantothenic acid. While pantothenic acid itself occurs naturally in plant and animal (including human) tissues, the types of panthenol used in cosmetic formulations are produced synthetically.
Panthenol is water soluble and mixes well with other ingredients, making it agreeable to formulate skincare products. It’s also widely used in haircare formulations and can be found in makeup products, as well as oral supplements.
Top

What is panthenol in skincare?
The panthenol used in skincare formulations comes in two forms: D-panthenol (a viscous oil, also known as dexpanthenol) and DL-panthenol (a white, crystalline powder) (1). Of these, D-panthenol has notably more research behind it and is described as the more bioactive form, meaning it’s more impactful, although DL-panthenol is still considered beneficial (2). Both have a place in skincare thanks to their ability to amplify moisture and soothe skin.
Top

What skin type is panthenol good for?
While it can enhance any skin type, pantothenic acid benefits dry, dehydrated or compromised skin in particular. Its skin-softening and hydration-boosting properties form a powerhouse to improve rough, parched skin, leaving it feeling more supple and soothed.
Board-certified Dermatologist, Dr Corey L. Hartman adds, “Panthenol is a great way to fortify the epidermis and soothe a compromised skin barrier that is common in those with dry or dehydrated skin."
Top

What does panthenol do for skin?
There are various panthenol skin benefits. These include strengthening the barrier function, thanks in part to its ability to reduce transepidermal water loss (a fancy way of saying it helps prevent moisture evaporation from skin) due to its humectant properties (3).
Adding to the benefits, cumulative research shows D-panthenol has significant repairing and soothing properties, making it incredibly beneficial for skin that has experienced visible impairment from stressors. It may also play a role in visibly reducing facial redness triggered by sensitivity (4).
Dr Hartman further explains: “Panthenol soothes the skin and can help to improve hydration levels. It has also been shown to lessen the appearance of redness in skin.”
Top

Is panthenol the same as hyaluronic acid?
No, panthenol and hyaluronic acid are different skincare ingredients, although they do both help to make skin soft, hydrated and more youthful looking. In fact, they can work together as a dream team.
Top

Is panthenol safe?
Panthenol has a long history of safe use in skincare and other personal care products (2). Of note, it has been thoroughly studied and analysed by the Cosmetic Ingredient Review Expert Panel, with the most recent 2018 assessment deeming panthenol safe in present practices and use. The report surveyed over 5,000 products using up to 5.3% concentrations of panthenol (5).
Top

Is panthenol safe during pregnancy?
While there are no known concerns about using panthenol topically during pregnancy, we always suggest checking with your doctor or midwife to discuss the products you plan to use during gestation and breastfeeding. When referring to topical products used during pregnancy, The Journal of Clinical and Aesthetic Dermatology notes: “Panthenol is considered safe since it is one of the elements in the skin” (6).
Top

How to use panthenol for skin
Panthenol can be found in many types of skincare products, which allows you to incorporate it into your routine in a variety of ways. Generally speaking, you’ll reap the most benefit from panthenol when used in leave-on products such as moisturisers, serums, toners and body lotions where it has a longer amount of time to interact with skin. However, it can even be beneficial in rinse-off formulas, such as facial cleansers, as it lends a hydrating and skin-conditioning effect.
It’s proven to be gentle, soothing, and barrier-strengthening, which means panthenol can be used daily in your skincare and body care routines (7).
Top

Can panthenol be used with vitamin C, retinol, or other active ingredients?
Panthenol can be used with vitamin C, retinol, and other active ingredients. In fact, its ability to soothe skin and increase hydration can even help skin respond better to these potent types of ingredients.
Top

Can panthenol cause acne?
Panthenol hasn’t been shown to cause acne. In fact, its soothing properties may complement an anti-acne routine. As with any skincare ingredient, the formulary base that the panthenol is incorporated into matters. If your skin is prone to breakouts, avoid panthenol products that come in heavy, occlusive, rich creams, as those may result in clogged pores and exacerbate acne breakouts.
Top

Does panthenol clog pores?
Panthenol is not a pore clogging ingredient in and of itself. If the panthenol product you choose comes in a very emollient and/or occlusive type of consistency, then that base formula can potentially clog pores. However, that would be due to the overall texture of the product—not the panthenol itself. Panthenol can be incorporated into lightweight gels and even liquid formulas, where pore clogging isn’t a concern.
Top

Is panthenol good for hair?
Panthenol is good for hair when used as a conditioning agent that serves to moisturise. It can help improve the softness, shine, and look of dry hair. Outside of traditional topical methods, D-panthenol has been studied for promoting the formation of stronger hair, although researchers note that additional independent clinical trials are needed to confirm the results (8,9).
Top

How to use panthenol for hair
Panthenol is commonly included in hair conditioners and other types of haircare/styling products. Check your labels, as you might find that you’re already using it! No special usage instructions are required, just use the product as you normally would. For best results, look for leave-on products with panthenol, as its water-soluble nature doesn’t allow much of it to cling to hair in rinse-out products.
Top
Learn more about skincare ingredients.
References for this information:
1. Cosmeticsinfo.org, Accessed May 2022, ePublication
2. Journal of Dermatological Treatment, May 2017, pages 776-773
3. Journal of Cosmetic Science, July/August 2011, pages 361-369
4. Pharmaceuticals, June 2020, pages 1-12
5. Cosmetic Ingredient Review, March 2018, pages 1-51
6. The Journal of Clinical and Aesthetic Dermatology, February 2022, pages 49-57
7. American Journal of Clinical Dermatology, August 2022, page 427–433 (2002)
8. Current Issues in Molecular Biology, September 2021, pages 1,361-1,373
9. Journal of Cosmetic Dermatology, January 2020, pages 75-77






 

Do you want more skincare advice, tips and exclusive offers?
Sign up for our newsletter and become a Paula's Choice Member. Your benefits:
+ Welcome gift*
+ Exclusive deals*
+ Skincare advice
+ Birthday gift

Email Address*:























* Only valid for new registrations. Valid on orders from € 25.




Related products














                Skin Recovery Toner
            



                        
                            Dry skin
                        
                    









€ 27,00




































                Hyaluronic Acid Booster
            



                        
                            All skin types
                        
                    









€ 43,00



























NEW











                5% Niacinamide Body Serum
            



                        
                            All skin types
                        
                    









€ 36,00




































                Clear Cleanser
            



                        
                            All skin types
                        
                    









€ 22,00




































                Hair & Body Shampoo
            



                        
                            All skin types
                        
                    









€ 23,00




































Related articles

How to repair a damaged skin barrier
Replenishing very dry skin
Skincare for your body




 Back 





Customer Service
Need help with finding the right product for you skin? Our customer care team are skincare and product experts and can guide you to the best skin of your life.


Newsletter
Sign up for our newsletter to receive exclusive offers and expert skincare advice






















































Special offers when you sign up






Send





















Our collections



Clear


Calm


Clinical


Defense


Boosters


Resist Anti-Ageing


Skin Recovery


Skin Balancing


Earth Sourced


Omega+ Complex


PC4Men


View all








Our commitments



Who we are


Paula's story


Science Advisory Board


Sustainable practices


COVID-19 safety






Our services



Product queries
 
Frequently asked questions


Shipping & delivery


Ordering & payment


International domains


Returns


Press


Contact








Our extras



Find your routine


Personal skincare advice


Subscriber offers


Digital gift card


Discount codes









		Our socials
	



























GENERAL CONDITIONS


PRIVACY POLICY


COOKIE POLICY







































Copyright © 2023 Paula's Choice


























We uncover the truth about skincare and about our cookies. They help us to ensure you get the best experience on our website. Together with our partners, we can adjust ads to your personal interests. Cookies also enable social media to make use of your internet behaviour for other purposes. They also help us understand how our site is being used. Read our Cookie Notice or manage your Cookie Preferences. By clicking "Accept all cookies" you consent to our use of cookies.


Accept all cookies


Only accept required cookies








 

We no longer support this browser


         It looks like you are using the web browser that we do not support. We recommend using one of the following browsers:
     

Firefox
Chrome


        Please ensure you're using the most up-to-date version to enjoy the best shopping experience
     

































