Document Name: role of Softisan 378 (Caprylic/Capric/Stearic Triglyceride) in Cream0
Document link: https://chemistscorner.com/cosmeticsciencetalk/discussion/caprylic-capric-myristic-stearic-triglyceride/








Caprylic/Capric/Myristic/Stearic Triglyceride? - Formulating - Chemists Corner

























































































 


 
 






















 

 

Start Here
Blog
Resources
Products
Career
Podcasts
Forum
 





















Shopping Cart


No products in the cart.


 
Sign in
Sign up












 










Search for:












 




Log In
Register
Start Here
Blog
Resources
Education
Podcasts
Career
Forum
 






Search for:





 


 


Cosmetic Science Talk
Cosmetic Science discussion forum. For people who want for formulate cosmetics and get advice from other formulators around the world.

*** Click on one of the three Forum categories below to start a new discussion ***

















Home › Cosmetic Science Talk › Formulating › Caprylic/Capric/Myristic/Stearic Triglyceride?
Tagged: formulating, saponification







Formulating


Caprylic/Capric/Myristic/Stearic Triglyceride?




						Posted by						
David08848  on August 28, 2017 at 2:36 am					


As you know, I am a. obsessed with shaving cream b. an over-thinker, so I can’t help but continually researching any product I am working on!  I found one with Caprylic/Capric/Myristic/Stearic Triglyceride listed in the ingredient list of a shaving cream.  One that lists itself as having “triple cushion” which is what helps keep the razor from doing damage to your skin.  
This is an ingredient I have never heard of but I am familiar with Caprylic/Capric Triglyceride and having the Myristic and Stearic versions of it sound ideal for a product like this that also includes those two as fatty acids in my formula!  It is described as being “similar to lard in consistency, but has superior oxidation stability and product uniformity” so I thought I may either add it after the saponification takes place or the other option would be to include it in the oil phase as it has a SAP value of “245-260mg KOH/g”.  Anyone familiar with this product or have any suggestions I would welcome them!  
Thank you!




mghanem  replied 5 years, 3 months ago 

3 Members
·

						4 Replies					





formulatingsaponification 






				4 Replies			







 

David08848
Member September 2, 2017 at 6:56 pm





Sourcing this product has been a problem but in researching it I did find one reference that it was better in many aspects as Shea Butter and another suggesting it has the consistency of lard which got me thinking… perhaps I could combine some Caprylic/Capric Triglyceride with some Shea Butter… just thinking through that at the moment… any thoughts?  
I haven’t found a formula or product listing with this ingredients that is only “soap based” as my formula is so I am thinking that it isn’t saponified in the process…







 

Tom
Member September 18, 2017 at 6:12 pm





Softisan 378







 

David08848
Member September 19, 2017 at 1:15 am





Yes, and it is available from IOI Oleo GmbH… in Denmark!
I’ve come to the conclusion that this might not be the best product for my intended purpose!  I’ll just keep looking through Shaving Cream product ingredients listings and see if there is anything that strikes my eye!







 

mghanem
Member December 28, 2017 at 3:47 pm





Hi David, Just saw your post. 
We do supply this! We have customers that combine this or AcquaSeal Coconut to their their butters to help with any graininess  - if you have any questions, or need additional information, please feel free to contact me anytime. Please find the link for this products: 
Softisan 378 http://www.formulatorsampleshop.com/ProductDetails.asp?ProductCode=FSSD30044
AcquaSeal Coconut http://www.formulatorsampleshop.com/ProductDetails.asp?ProductCode=FSS20742
Thank you,Maggie GhanemFormulator Sample Shop










Log In to Reply























Public
All Members
Only Me




























PublicAll MembersOnly Me 

























Public
All Members
Only Me















Log In to Reply











Start of Discussion



0 of 0 replies							June 2018






Now













Username

Password



Remember Me




Register

Search Forums

Search for:


Forums


General

						2,255					


Formulating

						8,603					


Cosmetic Industry

						1,047					


Recent Discussions



Neutralizing agent




Ascorbic acid solution creates white cast




Rotary evaporator and essential oil extraction




CCTG (CAPRYLIC CAPRIC TRIGLYCERIDE)




Aluminum Starch Octenylsuccinate





Most popular discussions
Unanswered discussions











About
Blog
Resources
Podcasts
Terms
Contact
 © 2023 - Element 44 Inc By, Perry Romanowski
 







Report 






There was a problem reporting this post.






Harassment

Harassment or bullying behavior




Inappropriate

Contains mature or sensitive content




Misinformation

Contains misleading or false information




Offensive

Contains abusive or derogatory content




Suspicious

Contains spam, fake content or potential malware




Other




 



Report
















Block Member?






							Please confirm you want to block this member.						

							You will no longer be able to:						


								See blocked member's posts							

								Mention this member in posts							

								Invite this member to groups							

								Message this member							


							
							Please allow a few minutes for this process to complete.						



Confirm

















						Report  





					You have already reported this .				




































































































