Document Name: role of Candelilla Wax in Cover Cream0
Document link: https://www.newdirectionsaromatics.com/blog/products/all-about-candelilla-wax.html






Candelilla Wax – Protective and Softening Effects for Skin and Hair






































Blog Home
 Articles
 - Aromatherapy - How to Store Essential Oils - Technical Information - Useful Guides Products
 - Absolute Oils - Butters - Carrier Oils - Essential Oils - Botanical Extracts - Cosmetic Raw Materials - Floral Waters - Fragrance Oils - Herbal Oils - Other - Packaging - Spa Recipes
 - Essential Oil Recipes - Lip Balm Recipes - Bath Bomb Recipes - Butter Recipes - Massage Oils and Blends 















 SHOP

  |  

  |  

  |  

  |  











Blog Home|Articles 



AromatherapyHow to Store Essential OilsTechnical InformationUseful Guides




|Products 



Absolute OilsButtersCarrier OilsEssential OilsBotanical ExtractsCosmetic Raw MaterialsFloral WatersFragrance OilsHerbal OilsOtherPackagingSpa




|Recipes 



Essential Oil RecipesLip Balm RecipesBath Bomb RecipesButter RecipesMassage Oils and Blends




 




 







Blog
ProductsALL ABOUT CANDELILLA WAX 





ALL ABOUT CANDELILLA WAX



Content

What is Candelilla Wax?
Candelilla Wax Vs. Beeswax
Candelilla Wax Properties
Application for Candelilla Wax
Candelilla Wax Side Effects

 



 
WHAT IS CANDELILLA WAX?
Candelilla Wax – pronounced can-deh-LEE-ya – is a “vegetable” wax that is obtained from the Euphorbia cerifera botanical, better known as the small, wild Candelilla shrub. Its name, which means “little candle,” is a tribute to its history of being first used in candle making. It may also be a reference to the upright growth of the plant’s stems, which resemble pencils or, more fittingly, candles – even more so because of their waxy outer layer; in nature, Candelilla wax forms the thick coating of its source plant’s leaves and stems and functions as the plant’s defense mechanism against the severe weather conditions of the desert. As a water-proofing agent, it protects the plant against heat and dryness, thereby preventing moisture loss.
Candelilla Wax is collected by boiling the full-grown plant in a solution of water and Sulfuric Acid. The latter is meant to prevent the wax and water from forming an emulsion, which the rolling water could potentially facilitate. When the crude wax finally rises to the surface of the water and appears as a creamy, opaque, light-brown or yellow foam – called “cerote” – it is skimmed off. Next, the wax is melted again then filtered through Activated Carbon as well as Fuller’s Earth Clay. After this, it enters a filter press, is bleached with Hydrogen Peroxide, which later becomes neutralized, and is filtered once more. The final product is a hard, light-yellow wax that can be easily shattered due to its brittleness. After the wax has been further processed into blocks, lumps, pastilles, pellets, flakes, granules, or powder, it is ready to be used.
NDA’s Candelilla Wax is triple-refined and comes in the form of granular beads that have a particle size of approximately 1 mm. It is tan in appearance and exudes a mild, slightly sweet scent. Candelilla Wax has traditionally been used in various commercial applications for products such as inks, paints, crayons, polishing waxes and varnishes, pharmaceuticals, chewing gum, and candy; however, NDA’s Candelilla Wax is intended for topical applications only, hence it may be added to hand and foot creams, lotion bars, depilatory waxes, soaps, lip products and stick foundations among other cosmetics, as well as to candles.  
The plant-based source of this wax makes it ideal for formulating vegan products. Its texturizing property as well as its ability to create barriers between the skin and harsh environmental stressors makes it a valuable ingredient in products such as lip balms. Its protective and softening qualities also make it a popular additive in moisturizers. With an easy ability to combine well with other waxes, including Paraffin and Carnauba, it complements them primarily by helping to extend their beneficial properties. It is also reputed to be an effective substitute for them.


 
CANDELILLA WAX VS. BEESWAX
The many similarities that Candelilla and Beeswax share, namely their beneficial properties, scents, and melting points, to name a few, make these two interchangeable waxes natural alternatives to each other. The main difference is that Candelilla is a vegan wax, whereas Beeswax is considered to be an animal byproduct.


 
CANDELILLA WAX PROPERTIES
Candelilla Wax functions as a thickening and hardening agent, a plasticizer, a viscosity modifier, an emollient, and a skin-protective barrier agent that helps prevent the skin from losing moisture. It contributes shine and functions as a stabilizer, an emulsifier, a fast-absorbing lubricant, and a nourishing skin conditioner. Candelilla Wax is reputed to help reduce the appearance of stretch marks as well as the signs of aging, such as wrinkles and age spots. Furthermore, it is said to hydrate parched and scaly skin for enhanced smoothness.
Candelilla Wax is known to be an effective binding agent that easily fuses ingredients. This quality makes it easy to incorporate it into most other waxes as well as resins, both natural and synthetic. This emulsifying property mainly helps water and oil constituents to bind together with a smooth uniformity, a necessary effect for products like moisturizers, such as lotion bars, creams, and balms, to which Candelilla Wax is known to offer hydrating properties and easy spread over the skin’s surface.
Its firming effect means that it can be used to set and solidify formulas for various types of makeup, such as stick foundations, eye shadow, or lip products, to which it provides an ideal “slip” without causing the products to become too hard. This firming property is also beneficial for candle formulations, as Candelilla Wax contributes hardness and smoothness to the final product.


 
APPLICATIONS FOR CANDELILLA WAX
Candelilla Wax is insoluble in water but is highly soluble in oils and alcohols. To add Candelilla Wax to product formulations, begin by melting it before incorporating it into the chosen recipe. When adding it to formulas that require emulsification, incorporate it into their oil phases.




PRODUCT TYPE & FUNCTION





When added to this kind of formulation…
Face, Hand, or Foot Creams
Lubricants, Lotions, Sunscreens
Salves, Ointments, Balms
Pomades
Lipsticks, Lip Balms, Lip Gloss, Mascaras









EFFECTS





Candelilla Wax functions as a(n):

Skin Protectant
Fast-Absorbing Moisturizer
Nourishing Conditioner
Hardening Agent
Thickening Agent
Plasticizer
Viscosity Modifier
Stabilizer
Emulsifier
Lubricant
Substitute for Beeswax

 
It helps to:

Contribute shine/gloss, especially to lip products
Provide smoothness and hardness to products that require a high melting point and a stiff consistency
Add texture and structure
Give solid and stick products their structures by enhancing the viscosity of their oil parts
Contribute a level of firmness to particular textures, such as that of eyeshadows, without causing them to harden
Emulsify immiscible liquids in to prevent them from separating in formulations with creamy consistencies
Provide excellent glide/slip to cosmetics formulations for easy spreadability as well as easy removability
Enhance rate of absorption into skin
Contribute a faint sweet scent that is reminiscent of Beeswax
Form a protective film on the skin’s surface to help repel water
Create barrier products, such as balms
Blend natural powder/mineral colorants into a formula
Complement other waxes, such as Beeswax

 
The recommended maximum dosage is 1-25%
Examples of Applications and Their Usage Rates:

Balms (20-25%)
Creams (5-10%)
Conditioners (1-3%)
Deodorants (1-20%)
Eyeshadows (3-15%)
Hair Creams (3-8%)
Mascaras (2-25%)
Soaps (1-3%)








 
CANDELILLA WAX SIDE EFFECTS
As with all other New Directions Aromatics products, Candelilla Wax is for external use only. It is imperative to consult a medical practitioner before using this product for therapeutic purposes. Pregnant and nursing women as well as those with sensitive skin are especially advised not to use Candelilla Wax without the medical advice of a physician. This product should always be stored in an area that is inaccessible to children, especially those under the age of 7.
Prior to using Candelilla Wax, a skin test is recommended. This can be done by melting 1 tsp of Candelilla Wax in 1 tsp of a preferred carrier oil and applying a dime-size amount of this blend to a small area of skin that is not sensitive. Candelilla Wax must never be used near the inner nose and ears, or on any other particularly sensitive areas of skin. There are no known potential side effects of Candelilla Wax. In the event of an allergic reaction, discontinue use of the product and see a doctor, pharmacist, or allergist immediately for a health assessment and appropriate remedial action. To prevent side effects, consult with a medical professional prior to use.


IMPORTANT: All New Directions Aromatics (NDA) products are for external use only unless otherwise indicated. This information is not intended to diagnose, treat, cure, or prevent any disease, and it should not be used by anyone who is pregnant or under the care of a medical practitioner. Please refer to our policies for further details, and our disclaimer below.

Read Disclaimer






Buy Products


Raw MaterialsView our complete range of Raw Materials 
 Candelilla Wax
USD $52.99 (2.2lbs) - $1047.50 (55lbs)





Read about Cosmetic Raw Materials Types





ALOE VERA GEL JUICE






ARROWROOT POWDER






BEESWAX






CETYL ALCOHOL






CITRIC ACID






COCO GLUCOSIDE






COLLOIDAL OATMEAL






EXFOLIANTS






FOAMING BATH BUTTER






GLYCERYL STEARATE SE






GRAPEFRUIT SEED EXTRACT






HYALURONIC ACID






MENTHOL CRYSTALS






OLIVE SQUALANE






POWDER BOTANICAL EXTRACTS






POWDERED FRUIT EXTRACTS






ROSEMARY ANTIOXIDANT






SODIUM COCOYL ISETHIONATE






STEARIC ACID






VEGETABLE GLYCERINE






WITCH HAZEL DISTILLATE










Save Up to 15% Off Sitewide! Use Code SPRING2023






Modal title
Close










Copyright ©1997-2023 New Directions Aromatics Inc. 
All rights reserved.


















