Document Name: role of Tri-Sept P in Eye Cream3
Document link: https://www.jax.org/news-and-insights/jax-blog/2011/september/cre-lox-breeding










Cre Lox Breeding for Beginners, Part 1 | JAX Mice and Clinical Research Services












































Jackson Laboratory















                                    Research & Faculty 





                                                                Overview
                                                            



                                                                Locations
                                                                    
                                                                        




                                                                                        JAX Mammalian Genetics - Maine
                                                                                    



                                                                                        JAX Genomic Medicine - Connecticut
                                                                                    





                                                                Faculty A-Z
                                                            



                                                                Labs A-Z
                                                            



                                                                Research Centers
                                                            



                                                                Scientific Services
                                                            



                                                                Data Science
                                                            



                                                                Tools & Resources
                                                            



                                                                Working at JAX
                                                            






                                    Education & Learning 





                                                                Education & Learning Home
                                                            



                                                                Online Learning
                                                            



                                                                Courses
                                                                    
                                                                        




                                                                                        In Person & Virtual
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Online MicroLessons and MiniCourses
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Bioinformatics Training Program
                                                                                    





                                                                Clinicians
                                                                    
                                                                        




                                                                                        Course Offerings
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Clinical Resources
                                                                                    





                                                                Postbac, Ph.D. & Postdocs
                                                                    
                                                                        




                                                                                        Postbaccalaureate Training
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Cooperative Ph.D. Training
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Postdoctoral Associates
                                                                                    





                                                                Students & Teachers
                                                                    
                                                                        




                                                                                        Science Fair
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Summer Student Program
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Fellowships
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Teacher Professional Development
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Genetics Learning Resources
                                                                                    



                                                                                        College Scholarship
                                                                                    








                                    Jax® Mice & Services 





                                                                Innovative Research
                                                                    
                                                                        




                                                                                        Breakthrough Lab
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Research Resiliency
                                                                                    





                                                                Find Mice & Biospecimens 
                                                                    
                                                                        




                                                                                        Why JAX Mice
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Search JAX Mice
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Order JAX Mice
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Biospecimens
                                                                                    





                                                                Services for Mice
                                                                    
                                                                        




                                                                                        Custom Model Generation
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Colony Management
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Surgical & Preconditioning Services
                                                                                    





                                                                In Vivo Pharmacology
                                                                    
                                                                        




                                                                                        Oncology
                                                                                    



                                                                                        PDX Models
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Humanized
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Neurobiology
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Immunology
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Antibody Evaluation
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Safety and Efficacy Studies
                                                                                    





                                                                Disease Area
                                                                    
                                                                        




                                                                                        Cardiovascular
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Immunology
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Metabolic Diseases
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Neurobiology
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Oncology
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Rare Diseases
                                                                                    





                                                                Customer Resources
                                                                    
                                                                        




                                                                                        Customer Service
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Technical Help
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Resource Center
                                                                                    








                                    Personalized Medicine 





                                                                What is Personalized Medicine?
                                                                    
                                                                        




                                                                                        Genetics vs. genomics
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Ethical considerations
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Personalized medicine and you
                                                                                    



                                                                                        What is CRISPR?
                                                                                    





                                                                Mice in Biomedical Research
                                                            



                                                                Areas of Research
                                                                    
                                                                        




                                                                                        Addiction
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Aging
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Alzheimer's & Other Dementias
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Cancer
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Diabetes
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Endometriosis Research at JAX
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Microbiome
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Rare diseases
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Vision
                                                                                    





                                                                Clinical Knowledgebase
                                                            



                                                                Maine Cancer Genomics Initiative
                                                            






                                    News 





                                                                JAX News
                                                            



                                                                JAX Blog
                                                            



                                                                Minute to Understanding
                                                            



                                                                Subscribe
                                                            



                                                                Press Room
                                                            



                                                                The Search Magazine
                                                            



                                                                Explore by Topic
                                                            






                                    About Us 





                                                                Fast Facts
                                                            



                                                                Our People & Culture
                                                                    
                                                                        




                                                                                        Our Values
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Diversity, Equity & Inclusion
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Faces of JAX
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Our Leaders
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Work With Us
                                                                                    





                                                                Our Campuses & Communities
                                                            



                                                                Our Impact
                                                                    
                                                                        




                                                                                        Collaboration at JAX
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Our Medical Impact
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Our Economic Impact
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Our Community Impact
                                                                                    



                                                                                        Our Environmental Impact
                                                                                    





                                                                Careers
                                                            



                                                                Contact Us
                                                            






                                    Give
                                












JAX Home


News and Insights


JAX Blog









Cre Lox Breeding for Beginners, Part 1


By Peter Kelmenson

Blog PostSeptember 23, 2011


























Simply put, the Cre/lox system rocks. It is one of the most powerful tools in the mouse geneticist’s toolbox. Why? Well, it enables them to generate tissue-specific and inducible knockouts and thereby have exquisite control over the location and timing of gene expression – important stuff when deleting a certain gene everywhere or during development leads to an embryonic lethal phenotype. And, it can be used to turn transgene expression on or off, track individual cells or cell lineages (as in the Brainbow or Confetti mice), generate inversions or translocations, and report gene expression. More novel and sophisticated uses for the Cre/lox system are being developed all the time. (Already know this? Here is Part 2!)
Research mouse models that incorporate the Cre/lox system typically involve generating double, triple, quadruple, or even n-tuple (is that really a word?) mutant/transgenic mice. As you can imagine, breeding such mice can get a wee bit complicated. Our Technical Information Services (TIS) is receiving more and more requests for help in designing breeding schemes for producing Cre/lox mice. Explaining these schemes can be difficult, and I swear that I can sometimes feel customers’ eyes cross while I’m trying to explain them over the telephone. So, in this post, I’m outlining a typical breeding scheme that I hope will help demystify the process of using the Cre/lox system to generate tissue-specific or inducible knockout mice. (In a future post, I will tackle the breeding schemes for using the system to turn transgenes on or off. I will also explain how to use Cre reporters).
Knockouts: remember, one cross just isn’t enough!
Here is the most efficient breeding scheme for generating Cre/lox tissue-specific or inducible knockouts. To generate mice that are heterozygous for a loxP-flanked allele and hemizygous/heterozygous for the cre transgene, mate a homozygous loxP-flanked mouse of interest to a cre transgenic mouse strain (see Figure 1 below). Approximately 50% of the offspring will be heterozygous for the loxP allele and hemizygous/heterozygous for the cre transgene.
Figure 1

Mate these mice back to the homozygous loxP-flanked mice (see Figure 2 below). Approximately 25% of the progeny from this mating will be homozygous for the loxP-flanked allele and hemizygous/heterozygous for the cre transgene. These will be your experimental mice.
Figure 2

About 25% of the offspring from this mating will be homozygous for the loxP flanked allele but will have nocre transgene. Depending on your experimental parameters, you can use these as controls (see Figure 3A below). Because the controls will not have Cre recombinase, any phenotypic differences between them and the Cre/lox mice should be due to the deleted gene in the Cre/lox mice. If appropriate for your experiments, you can maintain a colony that is homozygous for the loxP flanked allele, but in which one parent was hemizygous/heterozygous for cre and the other was a noncarrier/wild-type for cre.
This breeding scheme may not be the most efficient one for producing all Cre/lox strains. You will have to adapt it to the genotypes you want to produce and the genetic backgrounds and characteristics of the loxP-flanked and cre strains you use. To verify that Cre recombinase expression does not contribute to a phenotype of interest, I suggest using the cre strain itself (without any loxP-flanked alleles) as a control (Figure 3B). One of my colleagues, Andy, has written an awesome blog post on how Cre recombinase can produce a phenotype on its own. I highly recommend that you check out his blog.
Figure 3

The use of the Cre/loxP system for generating tissue specific or inducible knockouts is a powerful tool for mouse genetics, but it is only one piece of the total picture. Below, I would to focus on two additional issues: using Cre/lox mice to turn on or off transgenes, and using Cre reporter strains.
A Cre switch for transgenes
The Cre/lox system is one of the most powerful and versatile tools developed for mouse genetics. It gives mouse researchers sophisticated control over the location and timing of gene expression. Cre/lox is usually used to make knockout alleles, but it can also be used to activate gene expression.
The proper insertion of a loxP-flanked “stop” sequence (transcriptional termination element) between the promoter and transgene coding sequence blocks the expression of the gene. For a few examples of such strains, check out 008179 and 006481. Cre recombinase removes the stop sequence, so the transgene is expressed only in the cells where Cre is active (see Figure 4 below).
Figure 4

The Cre/lox system can also be used to produce strains in which a transgene is either inducible or expressed only in certain tissues. For example, mating the transgenic strain in Figure 1 to a strain that expresses Cre recombinase in mammary tissue produces double transgenic offspring that express theKras oncogene only in the mammary glands (Figure 5). Notice that only one generation of breeding is required (Hooray!).
Figure 5

The Cre/lox system can be used to turn off a transgene. Such a transgene is designed with loxP sites flanking all or part of it. As an example, see 008917. In this example, expression of Cre recombinase removes the transgene (Figure 6).
Figure 6

If you are looking for the right Cre-expressing strain for your experiments, you can search for strains at the JAX Cre Repository or through the Cre Portal at MGI.
Extra! Extra! Read all about Cre expression!
When researchers started creating Cre recombinase mouse strains to generate tissue specific knockout mice, they needed an easy way to confirm that Cre recombinase was active only in certain tissues. This need led to the development of Cre reporter strains. These strains are designed to express a visible marker, such as green fluorescent protein (GFP) or LacZ, only after Cre recombinase excises a loxP-flanked stop sequence (Figure 7 and 8.)
Figure 7

When such a reporter strain is mated to a Cre-expressing strain, it produces offspring in which the visible marker is expressed only in tissues with Cre activity (Figure 8). Again, only one generation of breeding is required.
Figure 8

Cre reporter strains can also be used to generate a source of labeled tissues/organs, which allow researchers to track cells in transplant or adoptive transfer experiments.


























More Like This










Prev
Next








The progress of genetic sequencing
We take a look at the history of genomic sequencing, where it's going in the future, and the power it has to potentially treat diseases like cancer.
Read More






Navigating precision medicine in cancer
With genomic tumor testing, a negative result is not always definitive. In some cases a genomic variant can be present but not detected by the…
Read More






Assessing patient health risks with limited or unknown family history
With November designated as Family Health History month, clinicians are sure to have seen lots of messaging…
Read More






Using the power of sequencing on our smallest organisms
The microbiome plays a vital role in our health and wellbeing. Now researchers are using sequencing technology to better…
Read More












Space


Quick Links


Contact


Donate


Subscribe






Utility Menu


JAX Home


Careers


Legal Information




Research Centers


Mouse Genome Informatics


Mouse Phenome Database




Leading the search fortomorrow's cures






Follow





Follow on Facebook





Follow on Twitter





Follow on LinkedIn





Follow on YouTube





Follow on Instagram







©2023 The Jackson Laboratory


Choose other country or region
China















