Document Name: role of Magnesium Aluminum Silicate/Thickener in Barrier Cream1
Document link: https://www.truthinaging.com/ingredients/magnesium-aluminum-silicate




Magnesium Aluminum Silicate
































































































 



JavaScript seems to be disabled in your browser.
                    You must have JavaScript enabled in your browser to utilize the functionality of this website.                






Free shipping on all domestic orders over $49
Truth Vitality









Sign Up






Subscribe to our mailing list
* indicates required

Email Address  *



First Name 





 

Sign Up












Login






























The honest truth about beauty & personal care products










Home


 Reviews


 Ingredients


 Community



 Get Involved Today



 Our Story











Home


 Reviews


 Ingredients


 Community



 Get Involved



 Our Story


 





Open subcategory
Close subcategory



























Home


Ingredients


Magnesium Aluminum Silicate

















Magnesium Aluminum Silicate
* A naturally occurring thickener


Magnesium Aluminum Silicate is a naturally occurring mineral derived from refined and purified clay that is used primarily as a thickener in cosmetics and beauty products. It is naturally of a flaky, white consistency and is used most often as a filler in deodorants, shaving creams and thick lotions. It is also important to note that Magnesium Aluminum Silicate has unusually large molecules; because of these large molecules, it is unable to be absorbed into the skin (source).







* A naturally occurring thickener
Functions of Magnesium Aluminum Silicate:
Magnesium Aluminum Silicate is a naturally occurring mineral derived from refined and purified clay that is used primarily as a thickener in cosmetics and beauty products. It is naturally of a flaky, white consistency and is used most often as a filler in deodorants, shaving creams and thick lotions. It is also important to note that Magnesium Aluminum Silicate has unusually large molecules; because of these large molecules, it is unable to be absorbed into the skin (source).
Safety Measures/Side Effects of Magnesium Aluminum Silicate:
According to the Cosmetic Database, Magnesium Aluminum Silicate is approved by the CIR Expert Panel, but only in limited concentrations. The CIR's concern stems from the known risk of any ingredient that contains aluminum compounds, which are known neurotoxins.
A study published in the International Journal of Toxicology in 2003 found that Magnesium Aluminum Silicate was a weak irritant in testing on rabbits; it has otherwise been considered to be safe for use in cosmetics and beauty products.
Recommended Products with Magnesium Aluminum Silicate:
MD Solar Sciences Mineral Lotion SPF 50 ($34)
As much as possible, products in the Truth In Aging shop are chosen for their safety profile as well as effectiveness. 


Become a member to read this article in full

Your membership includes:

Full Site-Wide Access - to all articles, reviews, features + ingredient research
Exclusive Access - spa services, treatments, life coaches + MORE
Cosmetic Concierge - personal consultations with Marta
Early Access - to new product launches
First to Know - about new ingredients + innovative products
Bonus Rewards + Gifts
Exclusive Offers + Deals
Expedited Shipping

Become a member





Become a member to Access More







Don’t Miss a Day to slay



                                    Your anti-aging regimen can't wait!
                                    Get full access to articles, and our skincare library including our ingredients database. Plus gain personal, expert skincare consultations from Marta, lots of free swag and MORE!
                                
Join and learn more about our platinum, gold, and silver memberships.
While you're deciding, enjoy a 2-week trial for subscribing to our newsletter, plus enjoy our Top 8 Anti-Aging Essentials.
Become a member











Sign up for our newsletter to
               get latest product reviews and
               Save 10%  on all orders over $50
          










Subscribe to our mailing list
* indicates required

Email Address  *



First Name 





 

Sign Up












Did you find this article useful?

yes
            -or-
            no



1
                















Products with Magnesium Aluminum Silicate









Related Articles




 

Reviewed and recommended: Kine...
No matter what age, you're still likely to get some spots. S...


Read more


 

Male Order: AHAVA Protective M...
Israel is about the size of New Jersey, so when I went for a...


Read more


More Articles: 

                                    Calvin Klein's foundation with Matrixyl 3000                                

 






Compare Products                    


You have no items to compare.













Truth In Aging's Five Best
The very best to choose from for your skin concerns.
Read More







Truth In Aging Videos
Helpful how-tos and reviews from Marta and friends.
Watch Now







Meet Our Contributors
The TIA community consists of our trusted reviewers.
Meet Them


 



Be Inspired
Inspiring thoughts and women who are aging gracefully.
Read More


 









Earn Rewards, get samples, Sign up and SAVE today











*Email:



Name




Sign Up







































HOME
REVIEW
INGREDIENTS
COMMUNITY
SHOP


OUR STORY
TRUTH VITALITY
CONTACT
FAQ
MEDIA




As featured in























©2020 truthinaging.com







Terms of Use


Privacy Policy


Shipping Policy


Returns policy


RSS




































   Loading...    



 

















Sign Up & Save! Take 10% off ALL your orders over $50!

















Sign Up
















