Document Name: role of Evening Primrose Oil in Eye Cream3
Document link: https://www.kiehls.com/skincare-advice/evening-primrose-oil.html



    The Skin Benefits Of Evening Primrose Oil | Kiehl's                                              

















  Skip to content   Skip to footer navigation  



      


  An error occured on the server, please try later or contact the customer service   ×  
  You're in offline mode with a limited website functionality. Please check your network connection.  
   Javascript seems to be disabled in your browser. In order to get the best possible experience please enable Javascript and reload the page.   



    

 Search 


   $ - US (EN)     Purchase options   Prices and payment are shown in USD. International shipping costs are based on your items, shipping method and destination.    Select your location   Australia   Austria   Belgium   Canada   Chile   Czech Republic   Denmark   France   Germany   India   Indonesia   Italy   Japan   Mainland China   Malaysia   Mexico   Netherlands   Norway   Philippines   Poland   Portugal   Romania   Russian Federation   Saudi Arabia   Singapore   South Korea   Spain   Sweden   Switzerland   Thailand   Turkey   Ukraine   United Arab Emirates   United Kingdom   United States   Viet Nam     Change currency There is only one currency available for your location: $ - USD    Change currency   $ - USD      Change language There is only one language available for your location: English    Change language   English      Apply        Customer Service Find a Store   





   



     Sign In         JOIN REWARDS   

      My bag 0 0 product in cart    My cart   



   Search  Search   Close   Clear          



              BEST SELLERS         NEW & NOW       
    View All New Products      
    Ultra Pure 5.0% Niacinamide Serum         Ultra Pure 1.5% Hyaluronic Acid Serum         Ultra Pure 9.8% Glycolic Acid Serum         Ultra Facial Repair Barrier Cream     
    Featured Now    
    10% Off Subscription!     
      SHOP OUR NEW CLEANSER        DISCOVER OUR ROUTINE SETS    
  
       SKINCARE       
    View All Skincare      
    Moisturizers         Cleansers & Scrubs         Eye Creams and Serums         Face Masks         Face Serums         Facial Toners         Sunscreen         Face Oils         Lip Care         Refills         Baby Care Products         Travel Size Products         Value & Jumbo Size Products         Last Chance Skincare     
      SHOP BY SKIN CONCERN      
    Acne & Blemishes         Anti-Aging & Firming         Dark Circles         Dark Spots & Hyperpigmentation         Uneven Skin Tone & Texture         Dry Skin         Enlarged Pores         Sensitive Skin         Combination Skin         Oily Skin     
      25% OFF SITEWIDE        SUNSCREEN SHOP    
  
       MEN'S       
    View All Men's      
    Men's Best Sellers         Moisturizers for Men         Cleansers for Men         Shave & After Shave for Men         Body & Deodorant for Men         Lip Balm & Eye Cream for Men         Hair & Beard Grooming for Men     
      Shop by Skin Concern      
    Anti-Aging for Men         Acne for Men         Men's Oily Skin         Enlarged Pores for Men         Fine Lines & Wrinkles for Men         Men's Dry Skin         Men's Sensitive Skin     
      Our #1 Mens Moisturizer    
  
       BODY       
    View All Body      
    Body Lotions & Body Oils         Body Wash & Scrubs         Hand Creams, Hand Salves & Soaps         Fragrance         Baby Care Products     
      VALUE-SIZE BODY CARE        How To Get Rid Of Body Acne    
  
       HAIR       
    View All Hair      
    Shampoos         Conditioners         Hair Styling         Hair Treatments & Hair Masks     
      Shop by Hair Concern      
    Dry Scalp & Dandruff         Very Dry Hair         Fine, Thin & Damaged Hair         Frizzy Hair     
      HOW FAST DOES HAIR GROW?        AMINO ACID COLLECTION    
  
       GIFTS & SETS       
    Gifts For All      
    Gifts for Her         Gifts for Him         Gifts for Pets         E-Gift Card     
      Gifts by Price      
    Gifts Under $50         Gifts Under $100         Gifts Over $100     
      GIVE THE GIFT OF KIEHL'S        SHOP OUR VALUE BUNDLES    
  
       SERVICES       
    VIEW ALL SKINCARE SERVICES      
    Chat With A Virtual Skincare Expert         Book An Appointment         Start Your Personalized Skin Analysis         Find Your Routine         Live from Kiehl's         Virtual Flagship Store     
      EXPLORE OUR VIRTUAL STORE        ANALYZE YOUR SKIN    
  
       THE KIEHL'S BLOG       
    VIEW THE KIEHL'S BLOG      
    Skincare         Expert Advice         How-Tos and Tips         Men         Body         Hair         Gift Guides     
      What is the Skin Barrier        Meet the Ultra Facial Family    
  
       FAMILY REWARDS       


   

Discover Kiehl’s Family Rewards
There’s a lot to love when you join the family. Get rewarded for treating your skin with perks such as a birthday treat, exclusive offers and so much more!




Join Now

  Learn more 


       OFFERS             FAMILY REWARDS       My Rewards Dashboard     Rewards Vault     FAQs           JOIN REWARDS     My account  Check Order Status  Find a Store  Customer Service    $ - US (EN)      Back  Purchase options   Prices and payment are shown in USD. International shipping costs are based on your items, shipping method and destination.    Select your location   Australia   Austria   Belgium   Canada   Chile   Czech Republic   Denmark   France   Germany   India   Indonesia   Italy   Japan   Mainland China   Malaysia   Mexico   Netherlands   Norway   Philippines   Poland   Portugal   Romania   Russian Federation   Saudi Arabia   Singapore   South Korea   Spain   Sweden   Switzerland   Thailand   Turkey   Ukraine   United Arab Emirates   United Kingdom   United States   Viet Nam     Change currency There is only one currency available for your location: $ - USD    Change currency   $ - USD      Change language There is only one language available for your location: English    Change language   English      Apply           Search   


   Search  Search   Close   Clear          






Main content














INGREDIENTS
3 Reasons To Use Evening Primrose Oil In Your Skincare Routine
Evening primrose oil is a botanical oil with myriad beauty benefits. Learn three ways evening primrose oil can boost your skin’s health and appearance ahead.

Share on

  Share on facebook   Share on twitter   Share on pinterest  








    Home      Skincare Advice     3 Reasons To Use Evening Primrose Oil In Your Skincare Routine   


  Back to Skincare Advice  











Botanical oils are among our favorite skincare ingredients, and for good reason: Rich, emollient oils can be highly effective at promoting softer, smoother-looking skin. Depending on the source, some oils also have additional benefits for your skin (and hair). That’s why you’ll find plant oils in so many of our best-selling products for your skin, body, and hair.
Of all of the non-comedogenic oils we use in our formulations, evening primrose oil is undoubtedly one of our favorites. That said, it’s not as well-known as buzzier ingredients, like Cannabis sativa seed oil or even argan oil. And while it features heavily in many of our products, we often field questions from customers about how to use it and what it does (“can you put primrose oil on your face” is one query we hear often). So if you’re not super familiar with what evening primrose oil is—or what it does—you’re not alone.
Ahead, we’re sharing everything we know about evening primrose oil and how to use this powerful ingredient in your skincare routine. You’ll learn about where it comes from and its beauty benefits—plus the best Kiehl’s products with evening primrose oil that you can add to your skincare routine. Read on for your all-in-one guide to evening primrose oil.






What Is Evening Primrose Oil?
Evening primrose oil is a lightweight oil extracted from the seeds of the evening primrose flower (also known as Oenothera biennis). This small, night-blooming flower is native to North and South America and has been used in traditional and folk medicine for centuries, if not longer. Historically, Native Americans used evening primrose to care for bruises and skin irritations. In the 1600s, evening primrose oil made its way to mainland Europe, where it was touted as a cure-all for different issues, including skin concerns.
These days, evening primrose oil is a popular ingredient in both skincare products and oral health supplements. Keep in mind, however, in regards to the latter, claims about primrose oil and health conditions lack evidence. It’s also important to note that you should always consult a doctor before taking any supplements.
Research does support the topical use of evening primrose oil for managing various skin concerns, including dryness and unevenness. These benefits likely stem from the oil’s high concentration of essential fatty acids, including linoleic acid (which plays a critical role in the synthesis of ceramides). Evening primrose oil also contains flavonoids and other antioxidants that can help protect your skin from external stressors.












Midnight Recovery Botanical Cleansing Oil

You’ll find evening primrose oil in our best-selling Midnight Recovery Botanical Cleansing Oil. This luxurious oil cleanser gently melts away dirt, oil, and even waterproof makeup without drying the skin. It also helps soothe skin and prepare it for your nightly skincare routine. Though it is oil-based, this indulgent facial cleanser is non-comedogenic and suitable for all skin types, including acne-prone skin. We recommend using it nightly to remove makeup and other impurities for skin that feels soft and supple.
Kiehl’s Expert Tip: For an even more thorough cleanse, try double cleansing. This technique involves first washing your face with an oil cleanser, then following up with a traditional foaming cleanser. Learn How To Pick The Best Face Wash For You.


SHOP NOW








3 Beauty Benefits Of Evening Primrose Oil
Now that you know what evening primrose oil is, we can start getting into what you’re really here for—learning how it can benefit your skin. Ahead, we’ll break down the demonstrated beauty benefits of evening primrose oil and provide tips on including it in your skincare routine. Keep reading to learn three ways evening primrose oil benefits your skin.






Beauty Benefit #1:
Evening Primrose Oil Helps Maintain Skin Hydration
Perhaps one of the best-known beauty benefits of evening primrose oil is its ability to reduce the symptoms of dryness. In skincare formulations, evening primrose oil has emollient properties, meaning it helps soften and smooth the skin, improving the skin’s overall texture. It also helps lock in moisture to minimize water loss. This effectively keeps the skin hydrated and supple and keeps the skin moisture barrier functioning as it should. As such, several studies have concluded that evening primrose oil is a viable treatment for atopic dermatitis—a condition characterized by dry, flaky, itchy skin.
If dryness is your primary concern, incorporating oil-rich moisturizing treatments into your regular skincare routine can help keep the symptoms of dryness at bay. We recommend Avocado Nourishing Hydration Mask, which contains evening primrose oil, avocado oil, and glycerin. This creamy mask helps nourish the skin and seals in moisture to minimize water loss. It’s clinically-demonstrated to improve skin hydration by nearly a third within just 15 minutes.* It’s suitable for all skin types and can be used up to three times per week to promote soft, replenished-feeling skin.
*Hydration and barrier tests on 26 subjects; results vs. baseline.












Midnight Recovery Eye

For dry skin around your eyes, try Midnight Recovery Eye, which stars evening primrose oil and butcher’s broom extract. This luxurious nighttime eye cream helps smooth and restore the delicate skin around the eyes. It also helps improve the appearance of eye-area concerns, including dark circles and puffiness. Apply a thin layer to your under-eye area and along your orbital bone before bed for fresher, younger-looking eyes by morning.
Kiehl’s Expert Tip: Hydrating skincare is vital for moisturizing dry, dehydrated skin, but so is drinking water. Pour yourself a glass when you finish reading!


SHOP NOW








Beauty Benefit #2:
Evening Primrose Oil May Help Protect Against Aging Stressors
As you know, the skin moisture barrier's primary job is to protect your skin from damaging external aggressors, like pollution and ultraviolet radiation. In order to do its job properly, the barrier needs nourishment in the form of essential vitamins, water, and lipid-rich fatty acids, including linoleic acid. Linoleic acid is the most abundant fatty acid in the skin barrier and is responsible for helping maintain the skin’s structure and function. A lack of linoleic acid in the barrier can result in visible skin concerns such as dryness and premature aging. An unhealthy or under-nourished skin moisture barrier is also more vulnerable to stressors that can result in premature skin aging, including fine lines and wrinkles. Studies show that using products rich in linoleic acid, like evening primrose oil, can help ensure the barrier stays strong and better able to resist the visible signs of aging. II












Midnight Recovery Concentrate

Keep your skin youthful and healthy-looking with our best-selling Midnight Recovery Concentrate. This moisturizing face oil contains evening primrose oil, olive-derived squalane, and fragrant lavender essential oil. It helps hydrate the skin and refine skin’s texture after just one night, while continued use promotes smoother firmer-looking skin. The top-rated formula is non-comedogenic and suitable for all skin types, including sensitive skin. Apply two to three drops of this unique oil to cleansed, toned skin before bed for more radiant, younger-looking skin by morning.
Kiehl’s Expert Tip: For an extra-pampering routine, you can use your facial oil to give yourself a rejuvenating facial massage.


SHOP NOW








Beauty Benefit #3:
It Can Help Even Your Skin Tone
Skin discoloration can result from many things, including excessive sun exposure, inflammation (especially acne-related inflammation), and even as a natural result of aging. Skincare products that target discoloration are often formulated with vitamin C. However, vitamin C isn’t the only ingredient that can help even your skin tone: Studies have shown that using skincare products with primrose oil can help reduce the appearance of skin discolorations, as well. III Scientists believe that this effect is due to the high concentration of linoleic acid in evening primrose oil. IV
Kiehl’s Expert Tip: Read our article Understanding Different Types of Skin Discoloration to learn more about the causes of (and treatments for) skin discoloration.






Next: Our Guide To Essential Oils






Sources
I. Chung, Bo Young et al. “Effect of Evening Primrose Oil on Korean Patients With Mild Atopic Dermatitis: A Randomized, Double-Blinded, Placebo-Controlled Clinical Study.” Annals of dermatology vol. 30,4 (2018): 409-416. doi:10.5021/ad.2018.30.4.409
II. Gehring, W et al. “Effect of topically applied evening primrose oil on epidermal barrier function in atopic dermatitis as a function of vehicle.” Arzneimittel-Forschung vol. 49,7 (1999): 635-42. doi:10.1055/s-0031-1300475
III. Koo, JH., Lee, I., Yun, SK. et al. Saponified Evening Primrose Oil Reduces Melanogenesis in B16 Melanoma Cells and Reduces UV-Induced Skin Pigmentation in Humans. Lipids 45, 401–407 (2010). doi:10.1007/s11745-010-3405-4
IV. Nasrollahi, Saman Ahmad et al. “Comparison of linoleic acid-containing water-in-oil emulsion with urea-containing water-in-oil emulsion in the treatment of atopic dermatitis: a randomized clinical trial.” Clinical, cosmetic and investigational dermatology vol. 11 21-28. 5 Jan. 2018, doi:10.2147/CCID.S145561














 
   






FREE SHIPPING FOR ORDERS $50+





Exclusive Offers





Gifting





Samples











Footer navigation


Contact Us



Email Us
1-800-543-4572




Customer Care


Email Us
Live Chat
1-800-543-4572
Find a Store
Order Status
FAQ
Shipping and Returns
Cookie Settings
e-Gift Card


                               Your Privacy Choices

Notice At Collection





About Kiehl's


Our History

Philanthropy
Careers

Corporate Gift Services
Kiehl's Rewards
Healthy Skin Philosophy








  Email sign up    required (*)    Email Sign Up*     Mobile Phone  forms-privacypolicy-signupgroup-label    forms-emailsignup-label*    By checking this box, I agree to receive recurring promotional and personalized marketing text messages (e.g. cart reminders) to the mobile number provided from Kiehl's using automated means (including for the selection or dialing of a telephone number) and to the Mobile Terms (which include an arbitration provision to resolve disputes). I confirm I am a US Consumer, 18+, the owner of the mobile number provided, and understand consent is not a condition of purchase. Msg frequency varies. Msg & Data Rates May Apply, Text HELP for help and STOP to cancel.  Privacy Policy Notice of Financial Incentives     Yes, I want to receive promotional emails from Kiehl’s and other L'Oréal brands. I understand I may unsubscribe to promotional emails at any time.

By clicking Submit, I confirm I am a US resident, 18+, and (1) agree to Kiehl’s Terms of Use and to receive promotional and other communications from Kiehl’s and other L’Oreal brands and programs; and (2) have read and acknowledge Kiehl’s Privacy Policy and Notice of Financial Incentives.*   Submit         Sign up              





























                                    Purchase option
                                


   $ - US (EN)     Purchase options   Prices and payment are shown in USD. International shipping costs are based on your items, shipping method and destination.    Select your location   Australia   Austria   Belgium   Canada   Chile   Czech Republic   Denmark   France   Germany   India   Indonesia   Italy   Japan   Mainland China   Malaysia   Mexico   Netherlands   Norway   Philippines   Poland   Portugal   Romania   Russian Federation   Saudi Arabia   Singapore   South Korea   Spain   Sweden   Switzerland   Thailand   Turkey   Ukraine   United Arab Emirates   United Kingdom   United States   Viet Nam     Change currency There is only one currency available for your location: $ - USD    Change currency   $ - USD      Change language There is only one language available for your location: English    Change language   English      Apply       











Copyright © 2023 Kiehl’s Since 1851.
This site is intended for US consumers. Cookies and related technology are used for advertising. To learn more, visit AdChoices and our privacy policy.







Privacy Policy


User Content Permission


Terms & Conditions


Accessibility Statement


Site Map


Skincare.com






 







      For the best experience, please turn your device   
      
    











