Document Name: role of Triethanolamine in Cream3
Document link: https://www.webmd.com/drugs/2/drug-61838/triethanolamine-salicylate-topical/details




Triethanolamine Salicylate Topical: Uses, Side Effects, Interactions, Pictures, Warnings & Dosing - WebMD




 


























 Skip to main content  Check Your Symptoms  Find A Doctor  Find A Dentist Health  A-Z Health A-Z  Common Conditions   ADD/ADHD  Allergies  Arthritis  Cancer  Coronavirus (COVID-19)  Depression  Diabetes  Eye Health  Heart Disease  Lung Disease  Orthopedics  Pain Management  Sexual Conditions  Skin Problems  Sleep Disorders  View All  Resources   Symptom Checker  WebMD Blogs  Podcasts  Newsletters  WebMD Magazine  Best Hospitals  Find a Doctor  Surgeries and Procedures A-Z  Featured Topics  Slideshow  Signs You Have Already Had COVID  Slideshow  Get Help for Migraine Relief Drugs &  Supplements Drugs & Supplements  Find & Review   Drugs  Supplements  Drug Basics & Safety   Commonly Abused Drugs  Taking Meds When Pregnant  Tools   Manage Your Medications  Pill Identifier  Check for Interactions  Drug Comparison Tool  Featured Topics  Slideshow  Vitamins You Need as You Age  Coronavirus  COVID-19 Vaccines Living  Healthy Living Healthy  Diet, Food & Fitness   Diet & Weight Management  Weight Loss & Obesity  Food & Recipes  Fitness & Exercise  Beauty & Balance   Healthy Beauty  Health & Balance  Sex & Relationships  Oral Care  Living Well   Women's Health  Men's Health  Aging Well  Healthy Sleep  Healthy Teens  Featured Topics  Article  Smart Grocery Shopping When You Have Diabetes  Quiz  Do You Know the Benefits of Walking? Family &  Pregnancy Family & Pregnancy  All About Pregnancy   Getting Pregnant  First Trimester  Second Trimester  Third Trimester  View All  Parenting Guide   Newborn & Baby  Children's Health  Children's Vaccines  View All  Pet Care Essentials   Healthy Cats  Healthy Dogs  View All  Featured Topics  Slideshow  Smart Snacks When You're Pregnant  Slideshow  Surprising Things You Didn't Know About Dogs and Cats News &  Experts News & Experts  Health News   Pets May Actually Help Fight Allergies  Mediterranean, Low-Fat Diets Are Best for Heart Problems  Least Amount of Exercise You Need to Stay Healthy  Nerve 'Pulse' Therapy May Help Ease Sciatica  Who Is Most Likely to Get Long COVID?  Experts & Community   Support Groups  Blogs  Webinars  News Center  New Book: Take Control of Your Heart Disease Risk  Featured Topics  WebMD Editorial Special  MINOCA: The Heart Attack You Didn’t See Coming  Get Our Newsletters  Health News and Information, Delivered to Your Inbox  Sign In  Mobile Apps  Subscriptions  Privacy and More  Sign In  Subscribe  MENU DRUGS AND MEDICATIONS CENTERFind a DrugMy MedicinePill IdentifierInteraction CheckerFind a VitaminFind a PharmacyVITAMINS & SUPPLEMENTS CENTERFind a Vitamin or SupplementVitamin Lifestyle GuideAssess Your Vitamin NeedsFIRST AID RESOURCESFirst Aid HomeFirst Aid Kit & Wound CareFirst Aid Mobile Drugs & Medications  Triethanolamine Salicylate Cream  Triethanolamine Salicylate Cream - Uses, Side Effects, and More Generic Name(S): trolamine salicylate  View Free Coupon  Uses  Side Effects  Precautions  Interactions  Overdose  Images  Reviews (6)  Uses Trolamine salicylate is used to treat minor aches and pains of the muscles/joints (such as arthritis, backache, sprains). It belongs to a class of drugs known as salicylates. How to use Triethanolamine Salicylate Cream Follow all directions on the product package. If you have any questions, ask your doctor or pharmacist.This medication is for use on the skin only. Do not get this medication in your eyes, inside your nose or mouth, or inside the vagina. If you do get the medication in those areas, flush with plenty of water.Apply the medication to the affected area no more than 3 to 4 times a day. Rub in gently and thoroughly. After applying the medication, wash your hands unless you are using this medication to treat the hands.Do not apply this medication on broken or irritated skin. Do not bandage or tightly wrap the affected area or apply heat to the area (such as using a heating pad). Doing so may increase the risk of side effects. Ask your pharmacist for more details.Tell your doctor if your condition lasts for more than 7 days, if it gets worse, or if it keeps returning. If you think you may have a serious medical problem, get medical help right away. Side Effects If your doctor has directed you to use this medication, remember that your doctor has judged that the benefit to you is greater than the risk of side effects. Many people using this medication do not have serious side effects.Stop using this medication and tell your doctor right away if any serious side effects occur, including: blistering/peeling/redness/irritation at the application site, nausea/vomiting, ringing in the ears.A very serious allergic reaction to this drug is rare. However, get medical help right away if you notice any symptoms of a serious allergic reaction, including: rash, itching/swelling (especially of the face/tongue/throat), severe dizziness, trouble breathing.This is not a complete list of possible side effects. If you notice other effects not listed above, contact your doctor or pharmacist.In the US - In the US - Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report side effects to FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or at www.fda.gov/medwatch.In Canada - Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report side effects to Health Canada at 1-866-234-2345. Precautions Before using trolamine salicylate, tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to it; or to aspirin or other salicylates (such as salsalate); or if you have any other allergies. This product may contain inactive ingredients, which can cause allergic reactions or other problems. Talk to your pharmacist for more details.Before using this medication, tell your doctor or pharmacist your medical history, especially of: asthma, growths in the nose (nasal polyps).Before having surgery, tell your doctor or dentist about all the products you use (including prescription drugs, nonprescription drugs, and herbal products).This drug is similar to aspirin. Children and teenagers younger than 18 years should not use this drug if they have chickenpox, flu, or any undiagnosed illness or if they have recently received a vaccine. In these cases, this drug may increase the risk of Reye's syndrome, a rare but serious illness.Tell your doctor if you are pregnant or if you plan to become pregnant. This medication may harm an unborn baby and cause problems with normal labor/delivery. It is not recommended for use in pregnancy from 20 weeks until delivery. If your doctor decides that you need to use this medication between 20 and 30 weeks of pregnancy, you should use the lowest effective dose for the shortest possible time. You should not use this medication after 30 weeks of pregnancy. Discuss the risks and benefits with your doctor.It is unknown if this product passes into breast milk. Consult your doctor before breast-feeding. Interactions Drug interactions may change how your medications work or increase your risk for serious side effects. This document does not contain all possible drug interactions. Keep a list of all the products you use (including prescription/nonprescription drugs and herbal products) and share it with your doctor and pharmacist. Do not start, stop, or change the dosage of any medicines without your doctor's approval. Does Triethanolamine Salicylate Cream interact with other drugs you are taking?  Enter your medication into the WebMD interaction checker  Check Interaction  Overdose This medicine may be harmful if swallowed. If someone has overdosed and has serious symptoms such as passing out or trouble breathing, call 911. Otherwise, call a poison control center right away. US residents can call their local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. Canada residents can call a provincial poison control center. Notes Keep all medical and lab appointments. Missed Dose If you miss a dose, use it as soon as you remember. If it is near the time of the next dose, skip the missed dose. Use your next dose at the regular time. Do not double the dose to catch up. Storage Store at room temperature away from heat. Keep all medications away from children and pets.Do not flush medications down the toilet or pour them into a drain unless instructed to do so. Properly discard this product when it is expired or no longer needed. Consult your pharmacist or local waste disposal company. Images  Next Free RX CouponSave up to 80% on your prescriptions. View FREE WebMDRx coupon Available coupons Save up to 80% on your prescription with  WebMDRx  View FREE WebMDRx coupon You Might Also Like What You Should Know About Psoriasis  Treating Eczema at Home: Remedies to Try  Psoriasis Flares in Sensitive Places  How to Stop the Itch From Psoriasis  Managing Itchiness on Dialysis  What's Causing Your Eczema Flares?  6 Ways to Safely Remove Psoriasis Scales  Understanding Your Child's Atopic Dermatitis  Wound and Skin Care For HS  Taking Care of Your Skin With Psoriasis  Psoriatic Disease Treatments: How to Save Money  Psoriatic Arthritis Myths and Facts  View More Related Links List Triethanolamine Salicylate Cream side effects by likelihood and severity  Who should not take Triethanolamine Salicylate Cream?  Should I avoid certain foods while taking Triethanolamine Salicylate Cream?  What should I know regarding pregnancy, nursing and administering Triethanolamine Salicylate Cream to children or the elderly?  What conditions does Triethanolamine Salicylate Cream treat?  Search Drugs  Related Drugs Common Searches  Adderall  Celexa  Cipro  Cymbalta  Flexeril  Hydrocodone  Prilosec  Prozac  Seroquel  Synthroid  Tramadol  Trazodone  Lexapro  Lisinopril  Mobic  Naproxen  Neurontin  Pradaxa  Prednisone  Vicodin  Warfarin  Wellbutrin  Xanax  Zocor  Zoloft  Show More  Show Less  Select a condition to view a list of medication options  pain associated with arthritis  backache  sprains and strains  chronic muscle or bone pain  muscle pain  inflammation of the sac surrounding the joint - bursitis  Drug Survey  Have you ever purchased Triethanolamine Salicylate Cream? Yes, In the past 3 monthsYes, In the past 6 monthsYes, In the past yearHaven't purchased but consideringDon't plan to purchase This survey is being conducted by the WebMD marketing sciences department.  Selected from data included with permission and copyrighted by First Databank, Inc. This copyrighted material has been downloaded from a licensed data provider and is not for distribution, except as may be authorized by the applicable terms of use.  CONDITIONS OF USE: The information in this database is intended to supplement, not substitute for, the expertise and judgment of healthcare professionals. The information is not intended to cover all possible uses, directions, precautions, drug interactions or adverse effects, nor should it be construed to indicate that use of a particular drug is safe, appropriate or effective for you or anyone else. A healthcare professional should be consulted before taking any drug, changing any diet or commencing or discontinuing any course of treatment. Today on WebMD Medications That Make You Tired  Common culprits and what you can do.  Pharmacy and Medication Tips  Things to remember when you fill your prescription.  Medication Side Effects  Tips for dealing with them.  Reading Medicine Labels  How to make sense of them. More About Drugs and MedicationsPill IdentifierMy MedicineInteraction CheckerDrugs and Medications A-ZDrugs and Medical ConditionsLatest Drug NewsFind a Pharmacy Find a Vitamin Health Solutions from Our Sponsors Penis Curved When Erect?  Could I have CAD?  Treat Bent Fingers  Treat HR+, HER2- MBC  Tired of Dandruff?  Benefits of CBD  Rethink MS Treatment  AFib-Related Strokes  Risk of a Future DVT/PE  Is My Penis Normal?  Relapsing MS Options  Liver Transplants Save Lives  Finance Plastic Surgery  Bent Finger Causes  Living With Psoriasis?  Missing Teeth? More from WebMD 5 Tips to Help With Relapsing MS  How to Thrive With Narcolepsy  Relief for Blocked Hair Follicles  Psoriatic Arthritis and Your Sleep  What Psoriasis Feels Like  First Psoriatic Arthritis Flare  Talking to Your Doctor About RA  Crohn's: A 'Full-Body' Disease  Avoiding Crohn’s Flares  Health Benefits of Hemp Seed Oil  Live Better With Psoriatic Disease  Types of B-Cell Therapy for MS  5 Health Benefits of Hemp  Why Prostate Cancer Spreads  Living with Advanced Breast Cancer  Where Breast Cancer Spreads  Find us on:  Facebook  Twitter  Pinterest  Policies  Privacy Policy  Cookie Policy  Editorial Policy  Advertising Policy  Correction Policy  Terms of Use  About  Contact Us  About WebMD  Careers  Newsletter  Corporate  WebMD Health Services  Site Map  Accessibility  Our Apps  WebMD Mobile  WebMD App  Pregnancy  Baby  Allergy  For Advertisers  Advertise with Us  Advertising Policy © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, an Internet Brands company. All rights reserved.WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information. 








