Document Name: role of Borax in Massage Cream2
Document link: https://wellnesscouncil.org/articles/how-to-make-massage-lotion/
 







How to Make Massage Lotion -










































 







Skip to content (Press Enter)





 









Home
Latest Posts
Recommended Gear
 











 



















Home
Latest Posts
Recommended Gear
 





















HomeRecommended GearArticlesHow to Make Massage Lotion 




 
ArticlesHow to Make Massage Lotion   WellnessCouncil  Updated on  June 15, 2021June 15, 2021 
 




Have you ever thought of making your own massage lotion instead of buying it from the store? It might sound like a very long, tedious and intimidating process, but it is super easy.
You will never go to the store to buy store-sold massage lotion again!
The beauty about making your own massage lotion is that you can add any ingredients and scent you choose.
Once you get the basics, you can make practically any massage lotion you want, and you can customize it to your preferred texture. Here are some massage lotion recipes you can use to make your very own massage lotion.
Citrus Massage Lotion
Ingredients

1 tablespoon shea butter.
1 tablespoon avocado oil.
1 tablespoon cocoa butter. 
2 tablespoons coconut oil.
1 tablespoon beeswax cubes. 
25 drops liquid sunshine.
5 drops wild orange.
A glass jar that will withstand high heat.
Small whisk.
Small jar for the finished product.

Instructions
Combine all the ingredients except the scented oils in a glass jar. Place the jar in a pot of water (about 2 inches high) and bring it to the boil. Make sure that absolutely no water gets into the mixture because that will cause it to get moldy.  
Allow the ingredients to melt, making sure they have melted completely and mixed adequately (especially the beeswax) before removing the pot from the heat. Wait for one minute for it to cool, then pour the mixture into your preferred container and add the essential oils. Leave the lotion to set for 2-12 hours before use. 

Lavender Massage Lotion
Ingredients

Coconut oil
Macadamia oil
Lavender essential oil

How to Make Lavender Massage Lotion
Ingredients
Put ¼ cup of macadamia oil and ¾ cup of coconut oil into a small saucepan. Heat the pan over a low heat to melt the oils. Stir occasionally to mix them and remove the saucepan from the heat once the oils have adequately combined. Put 48 drops of lavender essential oil into the mixture and mix thoroughly. Pour the mixture into your preferred container and let the mixture cool before use.
How to Make Borax Massage Lotion
Ingredients

1 cup distilled or filtered water
½ teaspoon borax powder
2 cups rice bran oil or apricot kernel oil
4 tablespoons of beeswax

Instructions
Put the distilled or filtered water into a large pot and mix in ½ a teaspoon of borax powder. Pour the rice bran or apricot kernel oil into a large heatproof bowl and add the beeswax. In a medium-sized pot, fill water up to the halfway mark and place the large container on top of this pot, making a double boiler.
The container has to be bigger than the pot so that it does not fall into the water. Put the pot with the bowl on top on a medium heat so the water boils gently.
Stir the melting ingredients until they thoroughly combine. Take the bowl off the top of the pot and set aside. Return the pot with the borax water to the stove and boil the mixture on medium heat.
Add the borax water into the oil and beeswax mixture and stir well until the ingredients are well blended, or mix them in a blender. Pour into glass jars and leave to cool before use.
Chocolate Massage Lotion
Ingredients

1 ounce cocoa butter
½ ounce almond oil
5 to 15 drops chocolate-flavored essential oils

Instructions
In the bottom of a double boiler, bring water to a slow boil. Add a pan on top of the boiler, turn off the heat and add the cocoa butter, which is the main ingredient and lends the lotion its name.
Melt the butter and swirl the pan until the cocoa butter completely melts. Add the almond oil, which is rich in vitamin E and helps to keep the lotion light and smooth. Swirl the pan or use a metal spoon to make sure the two combine well. 
Please do not skip this next step or the massage lotion will lose its fragrance. You need the oil to be just above room temperature. At this stage, check the lotion’s consistency. If you want the lotion to be thinner, heat it some more and add more almond oil.
If you want it thicker, return to the stove and add cocoa butter. Cool it first and proceed to the next step. Depending on the preferred lotion thickness, stir, whip, or mix the chocolate-flavored essential oils.
Start with about 5 drops and go up to 15 drops depending on how strong you want the scent. If you want the lotion to look like chocolate, add food coloring.
Edible Massage Lotion
Ingredients

¼ teaspoon of honey 
¼ cup vegetable glycerin (food grade)
¼ teaspoon organic extracts such as almond, vanilla, or orange extract

Instructions
Whisk everything together until thoroughly combined and then pour into a clean bottle or glass jar with a tight-fitting lid. All these ingredients have long shelf lives but, to be safe, use within six months.
Conclusion: A Word From the WellnessCouncil
Buying massage lotion is super expensive, considering massage lotions are used up faster in comparison to oils. This is because they are absorbed more quickly into the skin, so you need more reapplications per massage. Making your own lotion ensures it contains only the ingredients you want and you can customize the lotion, which is really useful if you are allergic to any ingredients.
The old saying that a journey begins with a single step is valid here. To embark on the lotion-making journey, all you need is to start. Within a short time, you will have mastered the art. Massage lotions are so easy to make, you will wonder why you ever bought from the store! 






Post Navigation





 

How to Make Massage Oil


Previous Post






 

What Is an Indian Head Massage?


Next Post                        




You May Also Like 



 


ArticlesWhat Is an Indian Head Massage?





 


Articles6 Neck Massage Techniques





                        GO TO BLOG                        











Recent Posts


What to Put in a Foot Bath


What Is an Indian Head Massage?


How to Make Massage Lotion


How to Make Massage Oil


The Benefits of a Head Massager


How to Give a Lower Back Massage to Ease Pain


How to Get Massage Oil Out of Sheets


How to Massage the Head


Guides

Recommended Gear

Best Foot Massagers: Reviews & Buyer’s Guide
Best Massage Places: Check them out
Best Massage Chairs: Reviews & Buyer’s Guide
Best Massage Table: Reviews & Buyer’s Guide
Best Neck & Shoulder Massagers


Foot Massage Prices
How to Get Insurance to Pay For a Massage Chair
History of Massage Chairs
Water After A Massage
Deep Tissue Massage: The Definitive Guide
What To Wear To A Massage
Massage Chair Benefits
Neck Massage Pressure Points
Headache After Neck Massage
How To Clean Your Massage Table
Massage Table Dimensions








© Copyright 2023 . All Rights Reserved.  Blossom Studio | Developed By Blossom Themes. Powered by WordPress.                
            


























