Document Name: role of Borax in Massage Cream1
Document link: https://www.catskillbotanicals.com/products/cayenne-massage-cream


  







    Cayenne Massage Cream
    
    
    
      – Catskill Botanicals
    
  
























































 





Skip to content






Submit







Close search










              Home
            



              About 
            



              Shop
            



              Contact
            















Home


About 


Shop


Contact










Submit





Search



Cart
Cart




expand/collapse
























Cayenne Massage Cream




Regular price



$45.00

Sale





                    Default Title
                  




                  
                    Add to cart
                  
                





 This item qualifies for free shipping. 
Cayenne Massage Cream, 2 ounces

relieves aches, pains, and nerves
soothes bruises, bites, and rashes

Ingredients: Saint John’s Wort Buds, Olive Oil, Grape Seed Oil, Aloe Vera Gel, Coconut Oil, Unrefined Shea Butter, Jojoba, Lanolin, Local Beeswax, Vitamin E, Extracts of Saint John’s Wort, Lemon Balm, Licorice, Frankincense, and Cayenne, Vegetable glycerin, Celtic Sea Salt, Borax. Essential Oils Of, Lavender, Rosemary, Lemon Balm.
How to use: Gently massage small amount into skin. Prior to general use, test for sensitivity.
WASH HANDS AFTER EVERY USE. NOT FOR FACE.
Saint johns wort buds are wild harvested in the Catskill Mountains. As the saint johns wort oil infuses in the sun, the beautiful yellow buds turn the oil bright red. The redness is indicative of hypericum which is excellent for nerve pain, and makes saint johns wort an excellent choice for relieving nerve pain, and for promoting a healthy inflammatory response. Our saint johns wort oil, and organic cayenne extract, along with other extracts and essential oils makes the perfect cream for relieving aches and pains and helping move fluid in the body. Good for poor circulation in feet and hands. Just make sure you wash your hands, and careful not to touch your eyes. 
 





Share
Share on Facebook



Tweet
Tweet on Twitter



Pin it
Pin on Pinterest


















Search


Shipping and Returns












Facebook





Twitter





Instagram






© 2023, Catskill Botanicals
 













