Document Name: role of Borax in Massage Cream4
Document link: https://www.abmp.com/updates/news/massage-sheets-combust-and-catch-fire-again


































Massage Sheets Combust and Catch Fire Again | Associated Bodywork & Massage Professionals










































Skip to main content








Toggle navigation









800-458-2267
Join Renew
Account Login








Member Benefits

Practitioners
Employers
ABMP Five-Minute Muscles
ABMP Pocket Pathology
Member Discounts
Free Online Scheduling


Massage Insurance

Massage Therapist Insurance
Massage Student Insurance
Massage School Insurance


Continuing Education

ABMP Education Center
ABMP CE Socials
ABMP CE Summit


Students & Schools

Students
Educators
ABMP Exam Coach MBLEx Test Prep
ABMP Exam Coach for Schools
Cornerstones Instructor Development
ABMP School Forum
Student Life for Schools
Student Resource Tour
Order Marketing Materials
Massage School Directory


Resources

COVID-19 Resources
Massage & Bodywork Magazine
The ABMP Podcast
MassageTherapy.com
RespectMassage.com
Legislative Advocacy
Massage Blog
Massage News
ABMP Testimonials
ABMP Code of Ethics












Home
 
Massage Sheets Combust and Catch Fire Again






            10/23/2018    

ABMP has recently learned of additional incidents concerning massage sheets combusting and catching fire, and would like to remind our members of this risk. The danger is caused by combustible massage oils that can saturate cotton sheets and catch fire in the dryer or when the sheets are stored in tight containers, even after they’ve been washed. You can avoid this risk by allowing sheets to air dry so that the residual oil can evaporate.
King 5 News in Seattle, Washington, reports that another massage therapist had his massage sheets combust and catch fire, this time inside his backpack. The therapist’s landlord, Karen Lucht, was fixing up one of her Seattle rental properties when she smelled something burning in the laundry room in the basement and called firefighters.
At first, Lucht couldn’t figure out where the burning smell was coming from. “There was no smoke, there weren’t any flames, but there was something in the air,” Lucht says.
When firefighters arrived, they identified a backpack in the laundry room as the source of the fire. The backpack was filled with freshly washed massage sheets that had come out of the dryer hours earlier. Captain Kyle Ohashi of the Kent Fire Department says the residual massage oil is what combusted and caused the fire.
“It actually happens quite often,” Ohashi said, explaining that people are often unaware of how combustible organic oils can be, especially when saturated into cotton sheets that can easily catch fire. He advises allowing the sheets to air out so that the residual oil can evaporate.
Category: News 
Log in to post comments
 

Comments


The dangers of oily massage sheets

Permalink    Submitted by Mary Kathleen R... (not verified) on November 15, 2016 - 2:05pm  

Sadly, this is all too common. Washing machines and dryers now have warnings about oil in fabrics. For massage sessions I prefer a good unscented lotion to an oil, and use very little of that. When you use less or lotion in your bodywork, it forces you to slow down and really connect with the client's body. Added benefit - compression based strokes, which are so useful, do not need lotion at all. 
 
Log in to post comments



Laundering massage sheets

Permalink    Submitted by Michele D. (not verified) on November 15, 2016 - 3:15pm  

I found recently that my massage soap solution was no longer doing the job. Now I add Borax 1/4 cup to each wash with reg detergent and bleach and sheets have never been cleaner and fresh smelling!!
 
Log in to post comments



Laundering massage sheets

Permalink    Submitted by Zara Z. (not verified) on November 3, 2018 - 7:31pm  

I mostly use coconut oil and I find that using a combination of a good detergent [I use 7th gen], distilled white vinegar, borax and baking soda does the trick!! Also drying on a low to medium heat can help.
 
Log in to post comments




 







News


View All 




Warning: Beware of TDLR Inspector Fraud

            04/21/2023    

ABMP was informed by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation (TDLR) that individuals may be posing as TDLR inspectors. We at ABMP want to pass along some important security information to help keep you and your establishment safe. 




Elevate Your Voice: Does Licensure Matter to You?

            04/17/2023    

Senate Bill 305 was introduced this year that would have implemented state massage licensure in Kansas. Unfortunately, that bill will not move forward this year. ABMP wants to hear from you: What are your thoughts about state licensure? Take our six question survey to help us learn from you! 




Licensed to Practice Massage, but Want to Move? There’s a Fix for That

            04/11/2023    

Learn about the Interstate Massage Compact, an agreement among various states that can make your nomadic lifestyle much easier. 


 


Blog


View All 




Communication with Neurodivergent Clients

            04/18/2023    


With 15–20 percent of the world’s population exhibiting some aspect of neurodivergence, it’s likely that many of the clients currently on your appointment schedule fall in this group. 




Faces of Bodywork: Davonna Willis

            04/17/2023    


Davonna Willis is the owner of 4 Nineteen Education & Training. She was recently featured in "Faces of Bodywork" in the May/June 2023 issue of Massage & Bodywork magazine. 




Nanette Ginise: Expanding Her Mission in the Recovery Field

            04/14/2023    


Nanette Ginise was one of the winners of ABMP’s Massage is for EveryBody 2022 contest, and we wanted to share more of her story, which exemplifies the inclusive values of this campaign.
 


 


Benefits


View All 




Podcast: Lubricants: The Goldilocks of Glide with Diana Dapkins

            04/21/2023    

In this episode of The ABMP Podcast, Kristin and Darren speak with Diana Dapkins about how the lubricants you use affect body mechanics and how to adapt when working with various client types. 




Podcast: Franchises Unite: NASF and EVS With Cindy Meiskin

            04/14/2023    

In this episode of The ABMP Podcast, Darren and Kristin are joined by Cindy Meiskin, chief experience officer of Hand & Stone, to discuss the National Association of Spa Franchises (NASF) and the new employment verification system (EVS). 




Podcast: Shingles Redux: “I Have a Client Who . . .”

            04/07/2023    

In our Third Annual Shingles Episode, we consider a client who developed shingles soon after receiving massage. Is it possible that the massage caused it? And what are the safety guidelines about working with someone during a shingles outbreak? 


 
 







About ABMP
Massage Liability Insurance
Advertising
Massage CE
Sitemap




Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Copyright Policy
Terms of Use



25188 Genesee Trail Road, Suite 200
   Golden, CO 80401
expectmore@abmp.com
800-458-2267




© 2021 Associated Bodywork & Massage Professionals. All rights reserved.








 
 


Please note: We have recently updated our Privacy Policy and Terms of Use. Learn more...Continue 



