Document Name: role of Cirami No. 1 in Protective Cream1
Document link: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/01140671.2014.978340






Full article: Grapevine propagation: principles and methods for the production of high-quality grapevine planting material






















































Skip to Main Content

















































Log in

 | 

Register










Cart



























Home




All Journals




New Zealand Journal of Crop and Horticultural Science




List of Issues




Volume 43, Issue 2




Grapevine propagation: principles and me ....




































Search in:


This Journal


Anywhere








Advanced search



















New Zealand Journal of Crop and Horticultural Science



Volume 43, 2015 - Issue 2






Submit an article
Journal homepage

























Full access





















195


Views




32


CrossRef citations to date





0


Altmetric
















Listen




Review article
Grapevine propagation: principles and methods for the production of high-quality grapevine planting materialH Waite National Wine and Grape Industry Centre, Charles Sturt University, Wagga Wagga, Australia; School of Agricultural and Wine Sciences, Charles Sturt University, Wagga Wagga, AustraliaCorrespondencehwaite@csu.edu.au, M Whitelaw-Weckert National Wine and Grape Industry Centre, Charles Sturt University, Wagga Wagga, Australia; New South Wales Department of Primary Industries, National Wine and Grape Industry Centre, Charles Sturt University, Wagga Wagga, Australia & P Torley National Wine and Grape Industry Centre, Charles Sturt University, Wagga Wagga, Australia; School of Agricultural and Wine Sciences, Charles Sturt University, Wagga Wagga, Australia














Pages 144-161





Received 27 Jan 2014Accepted 04 Sep 2014Published online: 21 Nov 2014







Download citation


https://doi.org/10.1080/01140671.2014.978340




CrossMark

































In this articleIn this articleIntroductionCharacteristics of high-quality grapevine materialEvaluation of grapevine materialFactors affecting the quality of cuttings and vinesProcesses for the production of high-quality nursery vinesRecord keepingDiscussionReferences
















Review article




Grapevine propagation: principles and methods for the production of high-quality grapevine planting material




















Full Article




Figures & data





References





Citations




Metrics





Reprints & Permissions


View PDF
PDF






AbstractSince the worldwide grapevine planting boom in the 1990s, there have been numerous reports of sporadic young vine failures and early decline of young vineyards. In many cases, the leading causes of these problems have been traced to defective, but often asymptomatic, propagating and planting materials infected with trunk disease pathogens, or with other defects that affect vine establishment, vigour and longevity. Current propagation practices favour cross-contamination by trunk disease pathogens and impose physiological stress that affects the quality of finished vines. This review describes the characteristics of high-quality cuttings and practices that will produce a consistent supply of quality planting material. The barriers to the production of high-quality grapevine propagating and planting material are also discussed.Keywords: grapevine propagationgrapevine quality standardshot water treatmentnursery sanitationtrunk diseases




IntroductionIn the past 30 years the global wine industry has undergone a transformation. It has changed from an industry characterised by relatively small, traditionally oriented, family-owned enterprises and a European focus, to a much more cosmopolitan industry dominated by multinational corporations. As a result there is now a stronger focus on quality assurance and consistency (Aylward Citation2005). More wine is now produced and consumed in countries that have little or no history of wine production and consumption, and grapes are being grown in some very challenging climates. However, the vine propagation industry has not experienced the same degree of change. It remains largely an industry dominated by small to medium-sized family businesses and cooperatives, and although the progress towards modernisation has enabled nurseries to increase production, the quality of planting material is not yet of a consistently high standard.Until recently, there have been few comprehensive standards or assessment criteria for grapevine material and apart from choice of variety and rootstock, other important attributes of planting material have not always been taken into account by nurseries and grape growers. Consequently, inferior material has sometimes been planted and there have been numerous reports from around the world of vine failures and underperforming vineyards needing to be replanted within 5–10 years of establishment (Smart et al. Citation2012). Many of the failed or underperforming vines were found to be infected with trunk disease pathogens, or to have other defects that affect establishment, vigour and longevity (Stamp Citation2001; Waite et al. Citation2013a).The losses caused by the failure or poor establishment and decline of newly planted vines have become a significant but often unrecognised burden for both the wine industry and the vine nursery industry (Scheck et al. Citation1998; Martelli Citation1999; Morton Citation2000; Stamp Citation2001; Komínek & Holleinová Citation2003; Waite & Morton Citation2007; Rego et al. Citation2009; Gramaje & Armengol Citation2011; Borsellino et al. Citation2012; Whitelaw-Weckert et al. Citation2013). However, there is a growing awareness of the impact of latent trunk diseases and other defects on young vines (Morton Citation2012; Smart et al. Citation2012; Smart Citation2013) and the attention of the wine industry is now turning more generally to the quality of planting material. In Australia, this has prompted the development of a comprehensive Standard for Grapevine Material, AS 5588–2013 (Standards Australia Citation2013), and it is anticipated that the quality of both propagating and planting material will improve significantly as a result.Defects in young vines originate from a number of sources and frequently involve interactions between several factors including cutting quality, nursery practices and cold storage conditions (Stamp Citation2001; Waite & Morton Citation2007; Gramaje & Armengol Citation2011), but fungal trunk diseases (TDs) transmitted in asymptomatic propagating material (Fourie & Halleen Citation2002) are often primary factors in vine failure (Gramaje & Armengol Citation2011; Whitelaw-Weckert et al. Citation2013).The list of TDs transmitted in propagation is extensive and currently includes Phaeomoniella chlamydospora, Phaeoacremonium spp., Botryosphaeriaceae spp., Cylindrocarpon spp., Ilyonectria spp. and Phomopsis viticola, which frequently occur as mixed infections (Larignon & Dubos Citation2000; Armengol et al. Citation2001; Aroca et al. Citation2006; Halleen et al. Citation2006; Zanzotto et al. Citation2007; Rego et al. Citation2009; Úrbez-Torres Citation2011; Billones-Baaijens et al. Citation2013; Whitelaw-Weckert et al. Citation2013). However, other pathogens including Fomitiporia punctata (Armengol et al. Citation2001) and Fusarium spp. (Halleen et al. Citation2003) have also been associated with what is now called ‘young vine decline’ and it is likely that more pathogens will be identified as research progresses. Furthermore, stresses imposed by poor nursery practices, hypoxic cold storage (Gramaje & Armengol Citation2012) and poor planting practices—factors that are damaging even if trunk diseases are not present—also appear to exacerbate the effects of TDs and result in seriously compromised vines that succumb soon after planting in the vineyard (Stamp Citation2001).Grapevines are relatively easy plants to propagate, but it requires considerable skill and organisation to produce the millions of vines of high quality that are needed around the world every year for new plantings and replanting diseased or uneconomic vineyards. Grapevine propagation techniques include in vitro propagation (Barlass et al. Citation1982), softwood cuttings (Warmund et al. Citation1986) and field grafting of rooted rootstock cuttings (Alley Citation1957). However, the most usual method of propagation in commercial nurseries is by bench grafting dormant one-bud Vitis vinifera cuttings on to 300–400 mm dormant hardwood cuttings of selected rootstocks and propagating them as one plant (Nicholas et al. Citation1992).To meet the increased demand stemming from the expansion of the wine industry, modern grapevine nurseries have evolved to resemble and function like factories, with operators working at single tasks on streamlined production lines. However, the in-house wastage rates of 40%–60% reported by nurseries worldwide are indicative of the problems faced by the nursery industry. Despite considerable progress towards modernisation (Borsellino et al. Citation2012), the most significant challenge remains the ability of nurseries to maintain a consistent supply of vines that are sound, healthy and uniform. This will require detailed descriptions of the practices that result in the production of high-quality cuttings and vines coupled with the objective and comprehensive quality standards for cuttings and finished vines.Although standards now exist in several jurisdictions including New Zealand (New Zealand Winegrowers Citation2011), Europe (European and Mediterranean Plant Protection Organization Citation1998) and Australia (Standards Australia Citation2013), they are not always comprehensive or supported by best practice documents. Consequently, defective material sometimes passes inspection. Here we describe the characteristics of high-quality cuttings and finished vines, identify the factors that impinge on quality, and outline the practices that can be utilised to produce a consistent supply of quality planting material that meets the highest standards.Characteristics of high-quality grapevine materialCorrect identity, high health status, soundness and physiological competence are the cornerstones of cutting and vine quality. Quality cuttings that have the capacity to become quality vines are uniform, of verifiable variety and clone, free from serious viruses and other pests and diseases, and have been grown and handled in a manner that preserves their physiological competence (Nicholas et al. Citation1992). In addition to the above characteristics, quality vines must have good plant architecture, be undamaged and free of physical defects, and have uncontaminated and fully healed graft unions. Quality nursery vines establish quickly and perform to expectations in the vineyard.Evaluation of grapevine materialThe evaluation of cutting and vine quality is normally based on a visual assessment when the material is dormant and without leaves. When dormant, it is very difficult to identify the variety and clone of cuttings and vines, and the effects of stress and latent pests and pathogens are not readily apparent. These factors have far-reaching effects on quality. Therefore, close scrutiny of accompanying documents and labels, dissection of several samples and sometimes laboratory analysis may be required to properly evaluate the quality of cuttings and vines (Chien & Golino Citation2006; Stamp Citation2010).From an evaluation of many apparently sound and healthy planting materials supplied by a number of nurseries, Stamp (Citation2001) reported incomplete graft healing in 13% of plants and weak or sparse roots in 4% of rootstock rootlings and 9% of grafted vines. The percentage of weak, undersized vines and rootstock rootlings was 3% and 8%, respectively. Overall, 39% of bench grafted vines and 35% of rootstock rootlings were deemed defective. The percentage of defective vines identified in this work was very high, but reports from other regions indicated that high percentages of defects in nursery vines were not unusual (Smart et al. Citation2012).Grapevine material that has major defects such as graft unions less than 80% healed or lesions on stems and roots is unlikely to perform to expectations in the nursery and vineyard. Material that has minor defects such as graft unions that are between 80% and 100% healed, or sparse, unevenly spaced roots may be acceptable, but the cumulative effect of several minor defects is an important consideration when evaluating the risk associated with such material (Stamp Citation2001).Factors affecting the quality of cuttings and vinesIdentity of source cuttings and rooted vinesCenturies of careful selection have given us the classic cultivars of V. vinifera that produce the premium wines we prize today (This et al. Citation2006). Furthermore, since the arrival of phylloxera (Daktulospharia vitifoliae) in the Old World in the early 1800s, resistant rootstocks have enabled the wine industry to continue to survive and prosper (Bisson et al. Citation2002). Because planting misidentified vines can have serious economic consequences, germplasm and mother vine collections have been established in most wine growing regions (Laucou et al. Citation2011) including the Foundation Plant Material Service in the USA (Alley & Golino Citation2000), the regional Vine Improvement Schemes and Associations in Australia (Cirami et al. Citation1988), ENTAV-INRA in France (Grenan et al. Citation2000), the Vine Improvement Association of South Africa (Fourie & Halleen Citation2004a) and the New Zealand Grapevine Improvement Group (Hayward et al. Citation1998). These valuable collections have been established to supply propagators with certified, true-to-type cuttings that are also free of serious viruses. They are regularly monitored for incorrectly identified vines and virus symptoms and the propagating material sourced from them has been pivotal in reducing the effects of grapevine viruses and the problems caused by misidentified vines on the wine industry. However, certification is not always a guarantee of physiological competence or that the material is free from other diseases and physical defects (Chien & Golino Citation2006). Furthermore, the use of certified cuttings for propagation is not universal, particularly when demand for cuttings outstrips the supply of certified material (Waite et al. Citation2013a).Soundness and physiological competenceSoundness and physiological competence are essential characteristics of quality propagating and planting material. Physical defects, including wounds caused by wire rub, hailstones, vermin or machinery, incomplete healing of graft unions, restrictions caused by tendrils or twine, damaged or blind buds and frost-damaged tissue all impinge on the quality of cuttings and the finished vines. They also cause structural weakness and provide entry points for pathogens (Stamp Citation2001). Physiological competence affects the underlying regenerative capacity of the material.Intrinsic physiological characteristics that enable a cutting or vine to establish well and grow vigorously are critically influenced by genotype, environmental factors (Winkler et al. Citation1974) and management, and are established in the previous season while the cane is growing on the mother vine (Samish & Spiegel Citation1957; Nicholas et al. Citation1992). The poorer rooting capacity of the rootstocks Ramsay (Smith et al. Citation2013) and 140 Ruggeri (Kracke et al. Citation1981) compared with other rootstock varieties is a direct function of genotype, but the majority of factors that affect regenerative capacity are a function of complex interactions between genotype, environmental conditions and mother vine management (Hartmann et al. Citation2001).Inadequate or excessive water and fertiliser, and temperature extremes in mother vine plantings all affect the regenerative capacity of cuttings taken from them (Nicholas et al. Citation1992). Excessive applications of nitrogen and water result in rank cuttings that have elongated internodes and relatively large pith diameters that strike poorly (Pearse Citation1943). Equally, cuttings from drought-stressed vines or under-fertilised vines that have borne heavy crops are generally thin and stunted, and also root poorly (Nicholas et al. Citation1992; Smart et al. Citation2002). If they do develop roots, such cuttings are likely to succumb to stress and make unsatisfactory growth in the nursery.Reduced photoperiod during shoot growth, thought to result in lower carbohydrate stores from reduced photosynthesis, has also been reported to have a negative impact on the rooting of cuttings (Hansen et al. Citation1978; Hartmann et al. Citation1990). This factor may also explain the poorer performance of cuttings from the distal ends of canes relative to cuttings from the basal ends (Nicholas et al. Citation1992), but there is little evidence for a direct correlation between starch reserves and rooting of cuttings (Treeby & Considine Citation1982). Carbohydrates are primarily stored in the ray tissue of 1-year-old canes and ripening of the canes does not occur until all the ray tissue is packed with starch grains (Mullins et al. Citation1992). Consequently, it is rare for a fully ripened dormant cutting of ≥7 mm diameter to lack adequate reserves for rooting and graft healing and it is possible that other, as yet unidentified physiological factors affect the regenerative capacity of cuttings (Treeby & Considine Citation1982; Smart et al. Citation2002).The lower strike rates in some rootstock varieties, particularly Vitis berlandieri hybrids, have been linked to constitutively high levels of the plant hormones gibberellic acid (GA) and abscisic acid (ABA). Soaking cuttings in water to leach these inhibitors has been a popular remedy (Kracke et al. Citation1981), but soaking can compromise the quality of cuttings by spreading disease (Waite et al. Citation2013a) and, if prolonged, flooding the tissue with water, causing hypoxia and initiating damaging fermentative respiration (Vartapetian & Jackson Citation1997). Hormone levels in cuttings change naturally over the storage period and propagation is often more successful if cuttings are processed late in the dormant season rather than in early or mid-winter (Alley Citation1979; Nicholas et al. Citation1992). In commercial nurseries, where many thousands of cuttings are propagated over an extended season, it is not always practical to delay processing. However, rooting can be promoted without recourse to soaking: for example, by the application of synthetic auxins in the form of indolebutyric acid (IBA) to the bases of cuttings of V. berlandieri hybrid rootstocks which are difficult to root (Nicholas et al. Citation1992). The use of IBA makes little difference to the more easily rooted rootstock varieties (Nicholas et al. Citation1992) and V. vinifera cuttings root so easily that rooting hormones are rarely used.Pests and diseasesThe impact of pests and pathogens transmitted in propagation on the establishment and longevity of vines is well documented (Morton Citation2000; Andret-Link et al. Citation2004; Retief et al. Citation2006; Rego et al. Citation2009), but the concept of mother vine plantings and vine nurseries as hubs for the dispersal of other pests and diseases across national and international boundaries (Martelli Citation1999; Jeger et al. Citation2007) is less well recognised.For viruses, primary control measures have focused on the production of clean certified mother vines grown from propagating material following thermal therapy (Over de Linden & Chamberlain Citation1970; Barlass et al. Citation1982; Golino Citation2000; Gribaudo et al. Citation2006). This method has been used to establish foundation plantings free of serious viruses (Cirami et al. Citation1988; Alley & Golino Citation2000; Grenan et al. Citation2000). However, foundation plantings are vulnerable to infection in the field (Walter & Martelli Citation1998). Although certified mother vines generally have a low titre of pests and diseases, there is a smaller but real risk of transmitting latent pests and pathogens such as phytoplasma diseases, crown gall, Pierce’s disease, mildews, botrytis blight, mealy bug, nematodes and fungal trunk diseases (Barlass et al. Citation1982; Rego et al. Citation2009) in certified propagating material.Furthermore, asymptomatic but infected cuttings from mother vines infected with TD pathogens can act as sources of inoculum during the propagation process resulting in cross infection of entire batches of cuttings and the finished nursery vines grown from them (Fourie & Halleen Citation2004a; Billones-Baaijens et al. Citation2013). TD pathogens have multiple host species (Crous & Gams Citation2000; Halleen et al. Citation2004; Slippers et al. Citation2004) and are spread by rain splash, wind and contaminated soil (Gubler et al. Citation2004; Halleen et al. Citation2007; Amponsah et al. Citation2009). These diseases are thus less easily managed in mother vines than viruses that are transmitted in propagation and by mealy bug and other controllable coccid vectors (Sforza et al. Citation2003). Because TDs are spread by wind and rain splash it is rare to find mother vine plots that are free from infection and it must therefore be assumed that all batches of cuttings, including those from certified sources, carry some TD inoculum (Fourie & Halleen Citation2004b).Symptoms of TDs in nursery vines include poorly healed graft unions with dark brown or black staining in the wood extending away from the wound, and dark staining and streaking in the woody tissue of the trunk extending away from disbudding wounds and upwards from the base of the vine (Stamp Citation2001; Wallace et al. Citation2004). However, small, highly localised areas of dark tissue around the base of a vine and at the graft union and disbudding wounds are a normal part of wound healing and are not usually cause for concern (Stamp Citation2001).Hot water treatment (HWT), usually but not universally at 50 °C for 30 min, is currently the most effective control for some trunk diseases including crown gall and nematodes and other pests and pathogens, in cuttings and finished vines (Lear & Lider Citation1959; Ophel et al. Citation1990; Crous et al. Citation2001; Fourie & Halleen Citation2004a,Citationb; Gramaje et al. Citation2009a). However, hot water treated material is susceptible to stresses caused by inappropriate handling practices (Gramaje & Armengol Citation2012), and because HWT does not always provide 100% control of TD pathogens (Rooney & Gubler Citation2001), its use remains controversial (Waite et al. Citation2013a).Mother vine management and cutting harvestThe impact of mother vine management and harvesting practices on the quality and physiological competence of cuttings and vines cannot be underestimated. A poor quality cutting is very unlikely to become a quality vine. However, little attention has been paid to the role of mother vine management in the production of quality propagating material, and there is a paucity of literature on the subject.In Australia, rootstock mother vines are not usually trellised, but allowed to sprawl along the ground from a self-supporting crown approximately 30 cm above the soil surface. Although this method of production is inexpensive and relatively easily managed, it may favour infection by trunk disease pathogens (Whiteman et al. Citation2007). However, experimental evidence is lacking. Trellising systems for mother vines that position the crowns and canes well above the soil surface are used in New Zealand and some European countries including Germany, Italy and Spain, but they are not universal. Furthermore, there is little published information on the effects of other management practices such as irrigation and nutrition regimes for cutting production. However, fully lignified and apparently normal cuttings taken from V. vinifera mother vines that have borne a very heavy crop often perform poorly and should be avoided (Hartmann et al. Citation1990). The reason for this is not known. It has been speculated that reduced starch stores in the wood are involved, but other less obvious and more complex physiological changes are also likely to be involved, including the carbon–nitrogen balance and its influence on carbon partitioning between roots, shoots and fruit and thus on ABA signalling (Morinaga et al. Citation2003; Grechi et al. Citation2007).Nursery managementHigh-quality propagating material, appropriate and timely processing, scrupulous sanitation (Hartmann et al. Citation1990) and meticulously kept records are the cornerstones of successful propagation. Good nursery practices preserve and enhance the quality of cuttings as they proceed through the propagation process, but quality propagating material can be rendered defective by inappropriate or careless practices in the nursery (Stamp Citation2010).The fundamentals of nursery management have been well known since the 1940s (Baker Citation1957) and details of best practice can be found in the many texts that have been published on the subject (Baker Citation1957; Hartmann et al. Citation1990). Nonetheless, good nursery practices have not always been communicated clearly and in a form meaningful for grapevine propagators, and consequently inadvertent cross-contamination and physiological stress are common features of current practice in the vine nursery industry. Grapevine nurseries can seriously compromise the quality of the finished vines with some common practices including cold storage of wet cuttings with free water and sawdust or other unsterile material added to the storage bags and by sealing bags to completely exclude air, soaking cuttings in water and erratically applied sanitary practices (Waite & Morton Citation2007). These practices are discussed below.SanitationGeneral sanitation in the nursery is most critical to the maintenance of quality in propagation (Daughtrey & Benson Citation2005), but often not well understood. Sanitary standards in the vine nursery industry have improved, but general sanitary procedures are not yet applied consistently throughout the propagation process (Waite et al. Citation2013a). Inadvertent contamination of grapevine material from sources including dust, water, tools, callusing media and clothing is common (Whiteman et al. Citation2004; Edwards et al. Citation2007; Vigues et al. Citation2009; Aroca et al. Citation2010; Billones-Baaijens et al. Citation2013; Cardoso et al. Citation2013).Soaking cuttings to compensate for dehydration that might have occurred during transport and handling and to leach growth-inhibiting hormones is widely believed to be beneficial to cuttings and often used repeatedly during the propagation process (Waite et al. Citation2013a). There is some evidence to support the use of soaking to promote cutting establishment (Alley Citation1979; Gramaje & Armengol Citation2012), but soaking severely compromises sanitation by providing multiple opportunities for microorganisms from the tissue and bark of infected cuttings to contaminate the hydration water and from there to infect propagation wounds on uninfected cuttings (Baker Citation1957; Whiteman et al. Citation2004; Gramaje & Armengol Citation2011; Waite et al. Citation2013b).Trunk disease inoculum has been found in water used for soaking cuttings in several countries including New Zealand (Whiteman et al. Citation2004; Billones-Baaijens et al. Citation2013), Spain (Aroca et al. Citation2010), Portugal (Cardoso et al. Citation2013), South Africa (Retief et al. Citation2006), Australia (Edwards et al. Citation2007), Italy (Pollastro et al. Citation2009) and France (Vigues et al. Citation2009). Although nurseries now generally use potable water and often add biocides (Waite et al. Citation2013a), the potential for cross-contamination remains if the biocide concentration is too low, resistant microorganisms are present (Fourie & Halleen Citation2004b) or multiple batches of cuttings are soaked in the same water. Microorganisms can also form biofilms that persist on the surfaces of soaking vessels after routine cleaning and potentially contaminate subsequent batches of cuttings (Costerton et al. Citation1994; Epstein et al. Citation2011; Waite et al. Citation2013b).Stressful conditionsSources of stress in the nursery include dehydration, exposure to extremes of temperature, soaking, wounding stress, and exposure to toxic fumes and agrochemicals. These are often overlooked as dormant cuttings are not actively growing and thus do not appear to be ‘alive’ to the nursery personnel. Furthermore, the effects of stress may be delayed or compounded (Lichtenthaler Citation1996), which makes it difficult to identify the original causes, particularly if they are viewed as minor and inconsequential.Dehydration can occur whenever cuttings are left exposed to the air, especially during the post-callusing period when the shoots and leaves are emerging. However, soaking cuttings to reverse the effects of dehydration floods the cutting tissue with water which has an inherently lower oxygen concentration than air, potentially triggering fermentative respiration if soaking is prolonged or the cuttings are prevented from drying to the normal moisture levels for dormant cuttings, usually 50% of fresh weight (Lavee & May Citation1997).In the vineyard, bud break in vines occurs before root growth commences (Mullins et al. Citation1992) and this sequence also occurs in grafted and ungrafted cuttings. Under normal field conditions, buds become hypoxic towards the end of the dormant season, prompting fermentative respiration that stimulates loosening of the bud scales and bud burst and thus a return to aerobic respiration (Halaly et al. Citation2008; Ophir et al. Citation2009). Buds of cuttings undergo the same sequence of events, but placing cuttings in sealed bags for long-term cold storage will promote and prolong hypoxia. Furthermore, sealed storage bags inhibit the dissipation of ethanol and acetaldehyde, the toxic by-products of fermentative respiration (Woodstock & Taylorson Citation1981; Kimmerer & Kozlowski Citation1982). These fermentation products combined with the oxygen deficit can impair the regenerative capacity of cuttings. The woody tissue of cuttings and/or young vines that have suffered prolonged hypoxia has been observed to be a characteristic grey-green colour rather than the true green or cream of healthy tissue. It has been observed by the author and remarked on by nursery managers that cuttings or vines with these symptoms die soon after planting out, or lack vigour, or suffer from greatly delayed bud burst and eventually fail.The high temperature of HWT can also be a cause of stress. Although research has demonstrated that HWT has a minimal impact on the viability of cuttings and nursery vines (Orffer & Goussard Citation1980; Wample et al. Citation1991; Wample Citation1993; Caudwell et al. Citation1997; Waite & May Citation2005; Gramaje et al. Citation2009a; Gramaje & Armengol Citation2012), there are anecdotal reports of significant losses of cuttings and finished vines occurring after HWT in commercial situations. In the relatively cool climate of New Zealand, unacceptable damage to vine tissue has been reported after treatment at 50 °C for 30 min; treatment at the slightly lower temperature of 48 °C for 30 min has been found to be safe and effective against some pathogens (Graham Citation2007). However, in the relatively hot climate of Spain, vines and their pathogens are acclimated to high temperatures and 50 °C for 30 min is insufficient to control TD pathogens, and the higher temperature of 53 °C is used without significant damage to the treated material (Gramaje et al. Citation2009a).There is also evidence that pre- and post-HWT practices, particularly cold storage, affect the response of vine material to HWT (Gramaje & Armengol Citation2012). The relatively high temperature of HWT has been reported to damage material that has not had sufficient time to acclimate to ambient temperature after removal from cold storage (Lindquist Citation1986). Acclimation to ambient allows the material to express some protective heat shock proteins that confer improved tolerance to the unnaturally high temperature of HWT (Morrell & Wample Citation1995). However, anecdotal reports from industry indicate that cuttings begin to emerge from dormancy if the acclimation period is extended beyond 8–10 h, making them susceptible to damage from HWT.Hot water treated cuttings are particularly susceptible to fermentative respiration in storage if they are placed in sealed bags within 24 h of treatment. The respiration rates of hot water treated cuttings are very high in the immediate post-HWT period (Waite Citation2005) and it is probable that available oxygen in sealed bags is quickly consumed, creating hypoxic conditions earlier than normal in the storage period. A sudden return to aerobic conditions after the opening of storage bags may also trigger the generation of damaging reactive oxygen species from electrons that accumulate in the respiratory chain during fermentative respiration (Vartapetian Citation2006).Gramaje and Armengol (Citation2012) found that long-term storage of cuttings for 4 weeks or more immediately after HWT was detrimental to cutting growth and establishment. There are also anecdotal observations from nurseries of strong ‘winey’ aromas indicative of fermentative respiration when sealed bags of hot water treated cuttings are opened after long-term storage (6 weeks or more). However, the effects of cold storage on cuttings can be variable. Wample (Citation1997) and Waite and May (Citation2005) reported that when hot water treated cuttings were able to cool to ambient and respiration returned to pre-HWT rates before packaging, placing in cold storage for 4–6 weeks was not detrimental. In commercial situations where cuttings are sometimes placed in cold storage before their respiration rate has returned to the pre-HWT rate, and cold storage conditions are not always ideal, treating cuttings post-storage reduces the risk of fermentation provided that they are not repackaged and returned to storage.Stress also favours disease development indirectly (Schoeneweiss Citation1981). The contribution of stress from inappropriate handling practices in the nursery, particularly soaking and anaerobic storage conditions, or prolonged storage for more than 6–8 weeks (Probst et al. Citation2012) may be a factor in the aggressive development of trunk diseases that occurs in young vines towards the end of the growing season. Stressful conditions are known to affect trunk disease development in the field (Graniti et al. Citation2000), but further investigation is required to determine if stressful conditions during propagation also affect trunk disease development in the nursery.Processes for the production of high-quality nursery vinesClearly defined, standardised and consistently applied standard operating procedures (SOPs) are the foundation of uniform, high-quality, high-value vines (Baker Citation1957), but they are not a common feature of grapevine nurseries (Waite et al. Citation2013a). Although nursery and vine accreditation schemes operate in several jurisdictions (European and Mediterranean Plant Protection Organization Citation1998; New Zealand Winegrowers Citation2011; Standards Australia Citation2013), they often lack detail, particularly in the area of general nursery sanitation and stress management. Consequently, nursery practices are variable within and between nurseries (Waite et al. Citation2013a), wastage rates are high, and the quality of the resulting planting material is inconsistent (Stamp Citation2001; Smart Citation2013).Standard operating procedures founded on best practice are the cornerstones of waste reduction (Hartmann et al. Citation1990). In vine nurseries they can prevent the incursion, establishment and transmission of pests and diseases (Baker Citation1957; Daughtrey & Benson Citation2005). Effective SOPs detail the practices in every step of the propagation process from cutting harvest to the sale of the finished product and identify the personnel responsible for their implementation, management and periodic review (Baker Citation1957). Furthermore, SOPs should have enough flexibility to allow for minor modifications that suit the needs of individual nurseries.Cutting harvest and handlingThe very first step in the propagation process is the harvesting of cuttings and their transport from the mother vine block to the nursery. Well-managed harvesting operations in mother vine blocks are critical to the maintenance of cutting quality (Daughtrey & Benson Citation2005). Cuttings left lying on the vineyard floor are liable to suffer dehydration, contamination by soil borne organisms and frost damage. Transport to the nursery may take several days, further increasing the risk of damage through dehydration, adverse temperatures and hypoxia. If the ambient winter temperature is above 2–4 °C, the respiration rate of the material increases. As a result, the available oxygen in the packaging is quickly consumed and metabolic heat or the products of fermentative respiration are unable to dissipate, which compromises the viability of the cuttings.Grading and storing cuttingsThe most effective method of preventing transmission of pests and diseases in propagation is to ensure only healthy cuttings enter the nursery (Daughtrey & Benson Citation2005), and for this reason cuttings sourced from a certification scheme are preferred. If uncertified cuttings are used, it is advisable for a sample to be tested for the presence of viruses and trunk disease pathogens by an accredited laboratory before propagation begins. In addition, the normal variability within each batch of cuttings means that grading of each batch is necessary to remove defective or diseased cuttings at the beginning of the propagation chain. This reduces the cost burden associated with processing cuttings that will not become saleable plants (Baker Citation1957). Grading cuttings for size also increases efficiency by reducing downstream handling and costs associated with in-batch variability.Cuttings that are not to be processed immediately after grading can be stored in a clean, cool room at 1–2 °C in clean packaging with several small, well-spaced, 7–10 mm holes that allow air to reach the cuttings without danger of dehydration. Soaking cuttings in water or packing them with added water or moisture-retaining materials such as sawdust promotes the growth of undesirable microorganisms, particularly Botrytis cinerea (Baker Citation1957). To prevent the growth of moulds on cuttings in cold storage, cuttings have previously been soaked in 0.5% Chinosol® (8-hydroxyquinoline sulphate). However, the use of Chinosol® is not absolute proof against the growth of undesirable microorganisms. Since it has also been reported to inhibit callusing and graft healing (Becker & Hiller Citation1977), the use of Chinosol® has declined. In some nurseries, the use of Chinosol® has been replaced by a brief fungicidal dip or spray applied to cuttings and storage containers. However, only the organisms susceptible to the fungicides are inhibited and undesirable mould growth can occur, particularly if the cutting surfaces are wet.Storage temperatures below 1 °C can cause physiological stress from freezing, and uncontrolled temperature fluctuations above 2 °C can have a serious impact on cutting quality (Hartmann et al. Citation1990). When storage temperatures exceed 4 °C, growth of microorganisms is promoted; the increased metabolic activity of the cuttings also generates heat, consumes available oxygen and leads to fermentative respiration (Becker & Hiller Citation1977). Other sources of stress in cold storage include fluctuations in metabolic rate caused by moving vine material in and out of storage and exposure to high levels of ethylene when vine material is stored with climacteric fruit such as apples and pears (Pierik et al. Citation2006).Hot water treatmentRoutine hot water treatment of all cuttings prior to propagation is the most effective means of controlling some trunk diseases in asymptomatic material, particularly if used in conjunction with fungicide drenches (Fourie & Halleen Citation2004b; Fourie & Halleen Citation2006; Gramaje et al. Citation2009b). However, HWT is a significant stress and should only be applied to cuttings of sound and healthy appearance.Treatment time and temperature depend on climate and vary from 48 °C for 30 min in cool climates (Graham Citation2007) to the standard 50 °C for 30 min in moderate climates (Waite & Morton Citation2007) and 53 °C for 30 min in warm climates (Gramaje et al. Citation2009a). In France, 50 °C for 45 min is used to ensure that the eggs of phytoplasma vectors are also destroyed (Caudwell et al. Citation1997). HWT is usually followed by an equal cooling time in clean water at ambient temperature. However, water cooling is a potential route of recontamination, particularly if the water has been used multiple times, is not of potable quality, or has been exposed to wind- or water-borne contaminants.Following HWT, cuttings should be allowed to recover by being loosely covered in a clean and protected environment for 24 h to become surface dry before further processing or packaging for storage. However, current information indicates that the storage life of hot water treated cuttings and vines is shorter than that of untreated material (Gramaje & Armengol Citation2012). It is therefore preferable to treat cuttings after storage and immediately prior to processing, provided that they are allowed to come to ambient temperature for 8–12 h before treatment.There is no standard design for HWT plants, which have various sizes and heating methods. HWT plants and equipment for commercial situations are designed to function effectively and efficiently. Even heating of water that is circulated by means of a pump ensures that it returns to the specified temperature less than 2 min after the baskets of cuttings are inserted. Tank capacity is usually in the region of 3000–5000 L, to accommodate 5000–10,000 cuttings, allowing about 0.5 L per cutting. Hot water tanks, cool down tanks and dipping baskets are constructed of stainless or galvanised steel to prevent corrosion, and hot water tanks are insulated to prevent heat loss. Prior to treatment, accurately calibrated temperature probes are inserted in a minimum of three zones (top, middle and bottom) and connected to data loggers that record the temperature, date, time and duration of each treatment. To improve efficiency, dipping baskets are designed to sit away from the bottom and sides of the tank and are packed so that the cuttings or vines lie in the same direction as the flow of water circulated by the pump. Very tight packing of cuttings or vines has been found to impede water flow and heat transfer.Grafting and callusing operationsGrafting and the preparation of cuttings for callusing are critical stages in the propagation process and necessitate making wounds that are inherently vulnerable to biotic and abiotic contamination unless very stringent sanitary standards are maintained (Baker Citation1957; Fourie & Halleen Citation2004b). Contaminated wounds and poorly matched graft unions fail to heal properly, remain open to infection and create structural weaknesses in the finished vines (Stamp Citation2001). General sanitary measures, including regular and thorough cleaning and tidying of nursery facilities and equipment, appropriate and timely disposal of plant waste and rubbish and managing waste water and runoff (Baker Citation1957; Stewart-Wade Citation2011) are essential elements of pest and disease control in vine nurseries. Designated grafting rooms that are not open to rain and wind-blown dust, or birds and other vermin, reduce the risk of contamination. Consumables should be kept in a designated storeroom away from vine material (Baker Citation1957).During propagation, grafting rooms should be cleaned frequently. Benches, grafting machines and tools should be disinfected with appropriate products such as sodium hypochlorite at every meal break and at the end of each day. However, practices such as sweeping or hosing the floor should only be done at the end of the day when the benches have been cleared as they raise clouds of dust or water droplets that can contaminate everything in the grafting room (Baker Citation1957).Other apparently inconsequential actions that compromise the quality of the finished vine and contribute to losses during propagation include delays in processing caused by meal breaks and exposure to high temperatures, agrochemicals, or ethylene from the exhaust of forklifts (Winkler et al. Citation1974; Hartmann et al. Citation1990; Nicholas et al. Citation1992; Saltveit Citation1999; Waite & Morton Citation2007). However, holding cuttings and pre-cut scion buds before grafting in water is the practice most likely to result in universal cross-contamination. Soaking has been shown to significantly increase the titre of microorganisms in cutting tissues because fungi and bacteria from the wood and bark of some cuttings can enter the water and infect propagation wounds (Waite et al. Citation2013b). Instead, cutting scion buds immediately before grafting, covering rootstock and scion cuttings with a clean damp cloth, and implementing measures to avoid delays in processing prevents dehydration and minimises the risk of cross-contamination (Hartmann et al. Citation1990).For callusing, cuttings are normally packed into clean boxes containing a moist, but not wet, sterile medium such as perlite or vermiculite, and then incubated for 2–3 weeks at 26–29 °C until a ring of callus forms around the base of the cuttings and the graft unions. Callusing is slower at lower temperatures (26–27 °C), but slower growing callus forms a stronger union than callus that develops at higher temperatures (28–29 °C). If cuttings are left in the callusing boxes for more than 3 weeks, excessive amounts of callus tissue can form that impedes the formation of new xylem and phloem across the graft union. Callus tissue should not protrude outwards from the graft union by more than 2–3 mm (Hartmann et al. Citation1990). Callusing cuttings at temperatures above 29 °C, or high-density packing of cuttings, can prevent the dissipation of metabolic heat with fatal consequences for the cuttings.The warm, dark and humid environment in callusing rooms is particularly favourable for the growth of some pathogens (Hartmann et al. Citation1990). Therefore, disinfecting callusing boxes, regular and thorough cleaning of callusing rooms, and prompt disposal of spent callusing media are essential elements in pest and disease control (Baker Citation1957). However, sweeping or hosing floors and walls can spread pathogens in raised dust and airborne water droplets. Mopping or washing floors and walls is preferable. Graft unions can be protected from dehydration during callusing by wrapping in budding tape or dipping in grafting wax (Becker & Hiller Citation1977), but callus development and graft healing require high levels of oxygen, and heavy waxing of the graft union prior to callusing can impede graft healing (Hartmann et al. Citation1990). Healing is also impeded if wax penetrates the graft union and forms a barrier between the rootstock and scion. Tight packing of cuttings in callusing boxes also prevents air movement around the cuttings, favours growth of pathogenic fungi (Hartmann et al. Citation1990) and inhibits the dissipation of potentially fatal metabolic heat generated by the cuttings during callusing. Monitoring of temperatures in callusing boxes is therefore advised.Post-callusing operationsIn any batch of callused cuttings there may be some that do not meet quality standards. Damaged or diseased cuttings and cuttings with incomplete graft unions should be removed to reduce processing costs and disease pressure (Nicholas et al. Citation1992).Callused cuttings require careful handling to avoid losses or checks to growth caused by transplanting shock. Cuttings are vulnerable to dehydration until roots form and it may be beneficial to harden (acclimate) the buds of callused cuttings before they are planted into containers or a field nursery. Hardening can be done by removing the top few centimetres of callusing medium to expose the buds and graft unions and holding the callusing boxes in a well-lit but protected environment for 2 or 3 days (Nicholas et al. Citation1992).If the graft union and bud have not already been waxed, the tops of cuttings can be dipped in a thin layer of grafting wax to prevent dehydration (Nicholas et al. Citation1992). Grafting wax also provides a measure of frost protection if the callused cuttings are planted directly into a field nursery. However, excessively thick wax is undesirable (Hartmann et al. Citation1990) and treatment with an anti-transpirant product such as the acrylic polymer ‘Envy’ may be preferable to additional layers of wax.The quality of potting mixes and field nursery soils is critical to cutting establishment. Potting mixes are normally soilless (Baker Citation1957) and are rarely sources of weeds or soil-borne pathogens (Daughtrey & Benson Citation2005). Supplementary fertilisers with moderate levels of nitrogen and moderate amounts of irrigation water applied at frequent intervals prevent stress and promote steady, moderate growth (Hartmann et al. Citation1990). However, excessive applications of water and nitrogen promote rank, soft growth.Field nursery soils should be well drained, friable and free of serious weeds, nematodes and pathogens (Hartmann et al. Citation1990). Transmission of black foot pathogens (Cylindrocarpon spp. and Ilyonectria spp.) is a particular problem in field nursery soils (Whitelaw-Weckert et al. Citation2013) and reducing the titre of these pathogens in the soil can be difficult (Agustí-Brisach & Armengol Citation2013). However, it may be possible to reduce disease inoculum in nursery soils by growing a rotation crop of mustard as a biofumigant (Bleach et al. Citation2010). It may also be helpful to use a fungicidal dip just before callused cuttings are planted out to reduce infection through the small wounds made when fragile root initials are broken during planting (Alaniz et al. Citation2011).Shoot growth is usually trimmed during the growing season to facilitate management and prevent overcrowding which promotes the development of fungal diseases. However, a regular spray programme is also necessary to prevent diseases such as powdery and downy mildews and botrytis blight (Hartmann et al. Citation1990). Pruning the roots of vines in field nurseries mid-season, by running a tractor-drawn blade through the soil approximately 30 cm either side of the vine row, promotes the formation of a fibrous root ball and facilitates lifting and handling at the end of the season, but the process of trimming the roots and shoots when the vines are lifted to facilitate handling also creates wounds that may be vulnerable to infection by soil-borne pathogens.After the vines are dug from field nurseries, damaged and sub-standard vines should be discarded and their roots and shoots lightly trimmed to reduce excessively long roots and shoots that interfere with handling. The roots are particularly vulnerable to dehydration if left exposed to the air (Hartmann et al. Citation1990). However, sitting the roots in water creates anaerobic conditions in the roots and promotes the growth and transmission of soil-borne pathogens. Covering the vines with clean damp cloths and prompt processing prevents dehydration and avoids the negative effects of soaking (Baker Citation1957).There are two main methods for storing bare-rooted vines: cold storage for long-term storage and ‘heeling in’ for short-term storage. For ‘heeling in’, bundles of trimmed vines are placed in trenches and the roots loosely covered with damp uncontaminated earth, sand or sawdust. However, the shoots of heeled-in vines soon begin to grow, and cold storage is the preferred method for holding vines in the dormant state for more than 1 or 2 weeks (Hartmann et al. Citation1990).Packaging and storage conditions for vines correspond to those for cuttings. Vines that are to be held in cold storage are washed to remove soil and plant debris, allowed to drain and may be trimmed again to further reduce the root and shoot systems for ease of packaging (Hartmann et al. Citation1990). However, trimming is a stress and causes a short-term rise in respiration rates (Macnicol Citation1976) and oxygen consumption. Therefore, freshly trimmed vines should be allowed a period of recovery before packing and placing in cold storage to prevent the development of fermentative respiration. Comments from the nursery industry have also indicated that placing untrimmed or lightly trimmed vines in cold storage, removing them for trimming before despatch, and then returning them to storage is detrimental for the same reasons and is therefore not recommended. A final grading of finished vines before despatch and dissection of a representative sample for signs of physical damage, trunk diseases and contamination in the graft union also helps to prevent the sale of sub-standard vines (Nicholas et al. Citation1992).Record keepingAlthough rarely stated overtly in the literature, record keeping and decision-making management tools underpin successful propagation. A well-designed record keeping and information management system that identifies and traces vine material through the whole propagation process, from the mother vines through to the sale of finished vines, is an essential tool for managing costs and detecting actual and potential problems (Fonsah Citation2006). It is the foundation of quality management and compliance systems. However, keeping and managing records can be seen as a tedious task and for that reason needs to be purposeful, streamlined and easy to manage (Rhigetti & Halbleib Citation2000; Sørensen et al. Citation2011).There are many record keeping and analysis systems that employ both paper-based and electronic techniques, including bar coding systems (Senneset et al. Citation2007). Choice of a system depends on the size and structure of individual businesses, but regardless of type, record-keeping systems need to provide useful and readily accessible information (Rhigetti & Halbleib Citation2000). Time devoted to the collection, maintenance and analysis of appropriate records is repaid many times over in reduced losses and increased profitability (Rhigetti & Halbleib Citation2000; Fonsah Citation2006).DiscussionAlthough data detailing the economic and social effects of poor planting material on the wine and propagation industries are limited, the issues associated with poor planting material are beginning to receive coverage in the wine industry press (Stamp Citation2010; Smart Citation2013) and moves to improve the quality of planting material are gathering momentum. However, the low cost of planting material, the underestimation of its true worth, and the disjointed and fragmented nature of the vine propagation industry are universal impediments to change in an industry that is strongly rooted in tradition and often escapes the notice of people in the wine industry education and research sectors.Given the dual imperatives of economic and environmental sustainability, the wine industry now demands a more professional and exacting approach to the selection and management of propagating and planting material (Bisson et al. Citation2002). There is much to be done, both at the local level and internationally. The comprehensive written standards for grapevine material that are emerging around the world (European and Mediterranean Plant Protection Organization Citation1998; New Zealand Winegrowers Citation2011; Standards Australia Citation2013) and the principles and processes outlined here are the essential first steps on the road to the propagation of quality planting material, but meaningful and sustained change requires a multifaceted and collaborative approach involving all sectors of the grape and wine industry. These include holders of germplasm collections, suppliers of cuttings and nurseries, as well as grape growers, researchers, extension staff and funding bodies. Every district and jurisdiction has its own approach to the issues associated with sub-standard planting material, but the multinational nature of the wine industry mandates a common approach to the core issues of vine health, identity and soundness that transcend local and international boundaries.Of the many challenges associated with developing a unified approach to vine propagation, quality of cuttings is a particularly difficult issue because it involves the financing, ownership and management of germplasm collections and multiplication blocks. Many of these are managed by industry groups and volunteers, and are under threat as a result of funding shortfalls (McMichael et al. Citation2013).Another important issue that has a great impact on the quality of grapevine planting material is nursery sanitation, particularly the practice of soaking cuttings in water, and hypoxic cold storage conditions. However, changing entrenched practices that are regarded as beneficial (Kracke et al. Citation1981; Gramaje et al. Citation2009a) can be a difficult task (Willock et al. Citation1999; Piderit Citation2000), particularly when the perceived benefits of these practices such as advanced bud break and the prevention of dehydration are apparent soon after treatment, but the detrimental effects of delayed establishment and increased pathogen load are not apparent until after the material has left the nursery (Stamp Citation2001; Oliveira et al. Citation2003; Fourie & Halleen Citation2004b; Smart Citation2013; Whitelaw-Weckert et al. Citation2013).The criteria set out here for evaluating the quality of grapevine propagating and planting material and the methods for producing it are, on the face of it, straightforward and evolutionary rather than revolutionary, but there are complex underlying structural issues in the vine propagation industry and the broader wine industry that make their implementation far from certain. Building a sound and practical internationally focused, industry-wide framework for the production of high-quality propagating and planting material will be a slow and painstaking procedure that will require much discussion, debate, testing and assessment of the risks and benefits of a more directed approach to vine propagation. Much goodwill, courage and a clear vision will be required to bring about fundamental improvements in planting material, but success will bring with it a new era in grape and wine production.




ReferencesAgustí-Brisach C, Armengol J 2013. Black-foot disease of grapevine: an update on taxonomy, epidemiology and management strategies. Phytopathologia Mediterranea 2: 245–261. [Google Scholar]Alaniz S, Abad-Campos P, García-Jiménez J, Armengol J 2011. Evaluation of fungicides to control Cylindrocarpon liriodendri and Cylindrocarpon macrodidymum in vitro, and their effect during the rooting phase in the grapevine propagation process. Crop Protection 30: 489–494. 10.1016/j.cropro.2010.12.020 [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Alley CJ 1957. Mechanized grape grafting. Richmond, CA, California Agriculture, 3 and 12 June. [Google Scholar]Alley CJ 1979. Grapevine propagation. XI. Rooting of cuttings: effect of indolebutyric acid (IBA) and refrigeration on rooting. American Journal of Enology and Viticulture 30: 28–32. [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Alley L, Golino DA 2000. The origins of the grape program at the foundation plant materials service. Proceedings of the ASEV 50th Anniversary Meeting, Seattle, WA, 19–23 June. Pp. 222–230. [Google Scholar]Amponsah NT, Jones EE, Ridgeway HJ, Jaspers MV 2009. Rainwater dispersal of Botryosphaeria conidia from infected grapevines. New Zealand Plant Protection 62: 228–233. [Google Scholar]Andret-Link P, Laport C, Valat L, Ritzenthaler C, Demangeat G, Vigne E et al. 2004. Grapevine fan-leaf virus: still a major threat to the grapevine industry. Journal of Plant Pathology 86: 183–195. [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Armengol J, Vincent A, Torné L, García-Figueres F, García-Jiménez J 2001. Fungi associated with esca and grapevine declines in Spain: a three-year survey. Phytopathologia Mediterranea 40: S325–S329. [Google Scholar]Aroca A, García-Figueres F, Bracamonte L Luque J, Raposo R 2006. A survey of trunk disease pathogens within rootstocks of grapevines in Spain. European Journal of Plant Pathology 115: 195–202. 10.1007/s10658-006-9008-5 [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Aroca, A, Gramaje D, Armengol J, García-Jiménez J, Raposo R 2010. Evaluation of grapevine nursery process as a source of Phaeoacremonium spp. and Phaeomoniella chlamydospora and occurrence of trunk disease pathogens in rootstock mother vines in Spain. European Journal of Plant Pathology 126: 165–174. 10.1007/s10658-009-9530-3 [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Aylward D 2005. Global landscapes: a speculative assessment of emerging organizational structures within the international wine industry. Prometheus 23: 421–436. 10.1080/08109020500350260 [Taylor & Francis Online], [Google Scholar]Baker KF ed. 1957. The UC system for producing healthy container grown plants. California, University of California Experimental Station Service, manual, 23, 331 p. [Google Scholar]Barlass M, Skene KGM, Woodham RC, Krake LR 1982. Regeneration of virus-free grapevines using in vitro apical culture. Annals of Applied Biology 101: 291–295. 10.1111/j.1744-7348.1982.tb00824.x [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Becker H, Hiller MH 1977. Hygiene in modern bench-grafting. American Journal of Enology and Viticulture 28: 113–118. [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Billones-Baaijens R, Ridgway HJ, Jones EE, Jaspers MV 2013. Inoculum sources of Botryosphaeriaceae species in New Zealand grapevine nurseries. European Journal of Plant Pathology 135: 159–174. 10.1007/s10658-012-0075-5 [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Bisson LF, Waterhouse AL, Ebeler SE, Walker MA, Lapsley JT 2002. The present and future of the international wine industry. Nature 418: 696–699. [Crossref], [PubMed], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Bleach CM, Jones EE, Jaspers MV 2010. Biofumigation using brassicaceous plant products to control Cylindrocarpon black foot disease in New Zealand soils. Phytopathologia Mediterranea 49: 128. 10.1007/BF00024593 [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Borsellino V, Galati A, Schimmenti A 2012. Survey on the innovation in the Sicilian grapevine nurseries. Journal of Wine Research 23: 1–13. 10.1080/09571264.2012.668853 [Taylor & Francis Online], [Google Scholar]Cardoso M, Diniz I, Cabral A, Rego C, Oliveira H 2013. Unveiling inoculums sources of black foot pathogens in a commercial grapevine nursery. Phytopathologia Mediterranea 52: 298–312. [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Caudwell A, Larrue J, Boudon-Padieu E, Mclean GD 1997. Flavescence dorée elimination from dormant wood of grapevines by hot-water treatment. Australian Journal of Grape and Wine Research 3: 21–25. 10.1111/j.1755-0238.1997.tb00112.x [Crossref], [Google Scholar]Chien M, Golino D 2006. National clean plant network clean vines for healthy vineyards. Practical Winery and Vineyard (January/February): 1–4. [Google Scholar]Cirami RM, van Velsen RJ, Niejalke J 1988. Grapevine virus indexing in the South Australian Vine Improvement Scheme 1974–1987. Australian Journal of Experimental Agriculture 28: 645–649. 10.1071/EA9880645 [Crossref], [Google Scholar]Costerton JW, Lewandowski Z, deBeer D, Caldwell D, Korber D, James G 1994. Biofilms, the customized microniche. Journal of Bacteriology 176: 2137–2142. [Crossref], [PubMed], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Crous PW, Gams W 2000. Phaeomoniella chlamydospora gen. et comb. nov., a causal organism of Petri grapevine decline and esca. Phytopathologia Mediterranea 39: 112–118. [Google Scholar]Crous PW, Swartz L, Coertze S 2001. The effect of hot-water treatment on 753 fungi occurring in apparently healthy grapevine cuttings. Phytopathologia Mediterranea 40: S464–S466. [Google Scholar]Daughtrey ML, Benson DM 2005. Principles of plant health management for ornamental plants. Annual Review of Phytopathology 43: 141–169. 10.1146/annurev.phyto.43.040204.140007 [Crossref], [PubMed], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Edwards J, Constable F, Wiechel T, Salib S 2007. Comparison of the molecular tests-single PCR, nested PCR and quantitative PCR (SYBR®Green and TaqMan®) – for detection of Phaeomoniella chlamydospora during grapevine nursery propagation. Phytopathologia Mediterranea 46: 58–72. [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Epstein AK, Pokroy B, Seminara A, Aizenberg J 2011. Bacterial biofilm shows persistent resistance to liquid wetting and gas penetration. PNAS 108: 995–1000. 10.1073/pnas.1011033108 [Crossref], [PubMed], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]European and Mediterranean Plant Protection Organization 1998. Certification scheme pathogen-tested material of grapevine varieties and rootstocks. http://www.furs.si/law/eppo/seme/ENG/Vinska_trta_certifikacija.pdf (accessed 2 January 2014) [Google Scholar]Fonsah EG 2006. Traceability: formulation and implementation of an economic efficient system in the fruit and vegetable industry. Choices 4th Quarter 21: 243–248. [Google Scholar]Fourie PH, Halleen F 2002. Investigation on the occurrence of Phaeomoniella chlamydospora in canes of rootstock mother vines. Australasian Plant Pathology 31: 425–426. 10.1071/AP02049 [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Fourie PH, Halleen F 2004a. Occurrence of grapevine trunk disease pathogens in rootstock mother plants in South Africa. Australasian Plant Pathology 33: 313–315. 10.1071/AP04005 [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Fourie PH, Halleen F 2004b. Proactive control of Petri disease of grapevine through treatment of propagation material. Plant Disease 88: 1241–1245. 10.1094/PDIS.2004.88.11.1241 [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Fourie PH, Halleen F 2006. Chemical and biological protection of grapevine propagation material from trunk disease pathogens. European Journal of Plant Pathology 116: 255–265. 10.1007/s10658-006-9057-9 [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Golino D 2000. Trade in grapevine plant materials: local, national and worldwide perspectives. Proceedings of the AESV 50th Anniversary Meeting, Seattle, Washington, 19–23 June. Pp. 216–221. [Google Scholar]Graham A 2007. Hot water treatment of grapevine rootstock cuttings grown in a cool climate. Phytopathologia Mediterranea 46: 124. [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Gramaje D, Armengol J, Salazar D, López-Cortés I, García-Jiménez J 2009a. Effect of hot water treatments above 50 °C on grapevine viability and survival of Petri disease pathogens. Crop Protection 28: 280–285. 10.1016/j.cropro.2008.11.002 [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Gramaje D, Aroca A, Raposo R, García-Jiménez J, Armengol J 2009b. Evaluation of fungicides to control Petri disease pathogens in the grapevine propagation process. Crop Protection 28: 1091–1097. 10.1016/j.cropro.2009.05.010 [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Gramaje D, Armengol J 2011. Fungal trunk pathogens in the grapevine propagation process: potential inoculum sources, detection, identification, and management strategies. Plant Disease 95: 1040–1055. 10.1094/PDIS-01-11-0025 [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Gramaje D, Armengol J, 2012. Effects of hot-water treatment, post-hot-water-treatment cooling and cold storage on the viability of dormant grafted grapevines under field conditions. Australian Journal of Grape and Wine Research 1: 158–163. [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Graniti, A, Surico G, Mugnai L 2000. Esca of grapevine: a disease complex or complex of diseases? Phytopathologia Mediterranea 39: 16–20. [Google Scholar]Grechi I, Vivin P, Hilbert G, Milin S, Robert T, Gaudillère J–P 2007. Effects of light and nitrogen supply on internal C:N balance and control of root-to-shoot biomass allocation in grapevine. Environmental and Experimental Botany 59: 139–149. 10.1016/j.envexpbot.2005.11.002 [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Grenan S, Bonnet A, Boidron R 2000. Results and thoughts on 35 years of sanitary selection in France. In: Bouquet A, Boursiquot JM eds. Proceedings of the VII International Symposium on Grapevine Genetics and Breeding. Montpellier, France, Acta Horticulturae 528: 713–721. [Google Scholar]Gribaudo I, Gambino G, Cuozzo D, Mannini F 2006. Attempts to eliminate grapevine rupestris stem pitting-associated virus from grapevine clones. Journal of Plant Pathology 88: 293–298. [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Gubler WD, Baumgartner K, Browne GT, Eskalen A, Rooney-Latham S, Bayramian LA 2004. Root diseases of grapevines in California and their control. Australasian Plant Pathology 33: 157–165. [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Halaly T, Pang X, Batikoff T, Crane O, Keren A, Venkateswari J et al. 2008. Similar mechanisms might be triggered by alternative external stimuli that induce dormancy release in grape buds. Planta 228: 79–88. 10.1007/s00425-008-0720-6 [Crossref], [PubMed], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Halleen F, Crous PW, Petrini O 2003. Fungi associated with healthy grapevine cuttings in nurseries, with special reference to pathogens involved in the decline of young vines. Australasian Plant Pathology 32: 47–52. 10.1071/AP02062 [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Halleen F, Schroers H-J, Groenwald JZ, Crous PW 2004. Novel species of Cylindrocarpon (Neonectria) and Campylocarpon gen. nov. associated with black foot disease of grapevines (Vitis spp.). Studies on Mycology 50: 431–455. [Google Scholar]Halleen, F, Fourie PH, Crous PW 2006. A review of black foot disease of grapevine. Phytopatholologia Mediterranea 45: S55–S67. [Google Scholar]Halleen F, Fourie, PH, Crous, PW 2007 Control of black foot disease in grapevine nurseries. Plant Pathology 56: 637–645. 10.1111/j.1365-3059.2007.01613.x [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Hansen J, Stromquist L-H, Ericsson A 1978. Influence of the irradiance on carbohydrate content and rooting of cuttings of pine seedlings (Pinus sylvestris L.). Plant Physiology 61: 975–979. 10.1104/pp.61.6.975 [Crossref], [PubMed], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Hartmann, HT, Kester DE, Davies FT 1990. Plant propagation: principles and practices. 5th edition. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, Prentice-Hall. 647 p. [Google Scholar]Hartmann HT, Kester DE, Davies FE, Geneve R 2001. Hartmann and Kester’s plant propagation: principles and practices. 8th edition. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, Prentice-Hall. 928 p. [Google Scholar]Hayward DJ, Le heron RB, Perry M, Cooper I 1998. Networking, technology and governance: lessons from New Zealand horticulture. Environment and Planning 30: 2025–2040. 10.1068/a302025 [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Jeger M, Pautasso M, Holdenrieder O, Shaw MW 2007. Modelling disease spread and control in networks: implications for plant sciences. New Phytologist 174: 279–297. 10.1111/j.1469-8137.2007.02028.x [Crossref], [PubMed], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Kimmerer TW, Kozlowski TT 1982. Ethylene, ethane, acetaldehyde and ethanol production by plants under stress. Plant Physiology 69: 840–847. 10.1104/pp.69.4.840 [Crossref], [PubMed], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Komínek V, Holleinová P 2003. Evaluation of sanitary status of grapevines in the Czech Republic. Plant Soil and Environment 49: 63–66. [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Kracke H, Cristoferi G, Marangoni B 1981. Hormonal changes during the rooting of grapevine rootstocks. American Journal of Enology and Viticulture 32: 135–137. [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Larignon P, Dubos B 2000. Preliminary studies on the biology of Phaeoacremonium. Phytopathologia Mediterranea 39: 184–189. [Google Scholar]Laucou V, Lacombe T, Dechesne F, Siret R, Bruno J-P, Dessup M et al. 2011. High throughput analysis of grape genetic diversity as a tool for germplasm collection management. Theoretical and Applied Genetics 122: 1233–1245. 10.1007/s00122-010-1527-y [Crossref], [PubMed], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Lavee S, May P 1997. Dormancy of grapevine buds – facts and speculation. Australian Journal of Grape and Wine Research 3: 31–46. 10.1111/j.1755-0238.1997.tb00114.x [Crossref], [Google Scholar]Lear B, Lider A 1959. Eradication of root-knot nematodes from grapevine rootings by hot water. Plant Disease Reporter 14: 314–317. [Google Scholar]Lichtenthaler HK 1996. Vegetation stress: an introduction to the stress concept in plants. Journal of Plant Physiology 14: 4–14. [Crossref], [Google Scholar]Lindquist S, 1986. The heat-shock response. Annual Reviews Biochemistry 55: 1151–1191. 10.1146/annurev.bi.55.070186.005443 [Crossref], [PubMed], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Macnicol PK 1976. Rapid metabolic changes in the wounding response of leaf discs following excision. Plant Physiology 57: 80–84. 10.1104/pp.57.1.80 [Crossref], [PubMed], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Martelli GP 1999. Infectious diseases and certification of grapevines. In: Martelli GP, Digiaro M eds. Proceedings of the Mediterranean network on grapevine closteroviruses 1992–1997 and the viroses and virus-like diseases of the grapevine bibliographic report, 1985–1997. Bari, CIHEAM, Options Méditerranéennes: Série B. etudes et Recheres; n. 29. Pp. 47–64. [Google Scholar]McMichael P, Hamilton R, Tassie E 2013. Review of grapevine germplasm collections in Australia. Scholefield Robinson Horticultural Services Pty Ltd, PO Box Fullarton South Australia 5063. Summary to Grape and Wine Research and Development Corporation. Project number: GWR 1112 36 p. [Google Scholar]Morinaga K, Imai S, Yakushiji H, Koshita Y 2003. Effects of fruit load on partitioning of 15N and 13C, respiration, and growth of grapevine roots at different fruit stages. Scientia Horticulturae 97: 239–253. 10.1016/S0304-4238(02)00199-1 [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Morrell AM, Wample RL 1995. Thermotolerance of dormant and actively-growing Cabernet Sauvignon is improved by heat shock. American Journal of Enology and Viticulture 46: 243–249. [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Morton L 2000. Viticulture and grapevine declines: lessons of black goo. Phytopathologia Mediterranea 39: 59–67. [Google Scholar]Morton L 2012. Examples of plant material compromised by fungal pathogens. Phytopathologia Mediterranea 51: 213. [Google Scholar]Mullins MG, Bouquet A, Williams LE 1992. Biology of the grapevine. Great Britain, Cambridge University Press. 239 p. [Google Scholar]New Zealand Winegrowers 2011. Grafted grapevine standard., from http://www.nzwine.com/assets/sm/upload/4o/gd/ou/ah/GGS_V_2_3_Final.pdf (accessed 2 January 2014). [Google Scholar]Nicholas PR, Chapman AP, Cirami RM 1992. Grapevine propagation. In: Coombe BG, Dry PR eds. Viticulture, Vol. 2, practices. Adelaide, Winetitles. Pp. 1–22. [Google Scholar]Oliveira H, Rego MC, Nascimento T 2003. Decline of young grapevines caused by fungi. Acta Horticulturae (ISHS) 652: 295–304. [Google Scholar]Ophel K, Nicholas PR, Magarey PA, Bass AW 1990. Hot water treatment of dormant grape cuttings reduces crown gall incidence in a field nursery. American Journal of Enology and Viticulture 41: 325–329. [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Ophir R, Pang X, Halaly T, Venkateswari J, Lavee S, Galbraith D et al. 2009. Gene expression profiling of grape bud response to two alternative dormancy-release stimuli expose possible links between impaired mitochondrial activity, hypoxia, ethylene-ABA interplay and cell enlargement. Plant Molecular Biology 71: 403–423. 10.1007/s11103-009-9531-9 [Crossref], [PubMed], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Orffer CJ, Goussard PG 1980. Effect of hot-water treatments on budburst and rooting of grapevine cuttings. Vitis 19: 1–3. [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Over de Linden AJ, Chamberlain EE 1970. Production of virus-free grapevines in New Zealand. New Zealand Journal of Agricultural Research 13: 991–1000. 10.1080/00288233.1970.10431493 [Taylor & Francis Online], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Pearse HL 1943. The effect of nutrition and phytohormones on the rooting of vine cuttings. Annals of Botany 17: 123–132. [Google Scholar]Piderit SK 2000. Rethinking resistance and recognising ambivalence: a multidimensional view of attitudes toward an organizational change. Academy of management Review 25: 783-794. [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Pierik R, Tholen D, Poorter H, Visser EJW, Voesenek LACJ 2006. The Janus face of ethylene: growth inhibition and stimulation. Trends in Plant Science 11: 176–183. 10.1016/j.tplants.2006.02.006 [Crossref], [PubMed], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Pollastro S, Habib W, Pichierri A, Masiello N, Faretra F 2009. Potential sources of Phaeomoniella chlamydospora inoculum in grapevine nurseries in southern Italy. Phytopathologia Mediterranea 48: 174. [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Probst C, Jones EE, Ridgeway HJ, Jaspers MV 2012. Cylindrocarpon blackfoot in nurseries – two factors that can increase infection. Australasian Plant Pathology 41: 157–163. 10.1007/s13313-011-0103-5 [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Rego C, Nascimento T, Cabral A, Silva MJ Oliveira H 2009. Control of grapevine wood 904 fungi in commercial nurseries. Phytopathologia Mediterranea 48: 128–135. [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Retief E, McLeod A, Fourie PH 2006. Potential inoculum sources of Phaeomoniella chlamydospora in South African grapevine nurseries. European Journal of Plant Pathology 115: 331–339. 10.1007/s10658-006-9025-4 [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Rhigetti TL, Halbleib MD 2000. Pursuing precision horticulture with the internet and a spreadsheet. HortTechnology 10: 458–467. [Google Scholar]Rooney SN, Gubler WD 2001. Effect of hot water treatments on eradication of Phaeomoniella chlamydospora and Phaeoacremonium inflatipes from dormant grapevine wood. Phytopathologia Mediterranea 40: S467–S472. [Google Scholar]Saltveit ME 1999. Effect of ethylene on quality of fresh fruits and vegetables. Post Harvest Biology and Technology 15: 279–292. 10.1016/S0925-5214(98)00091-X [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Samish RM, Spiegel P 1957. The influence of the nutrition of the mother vine on the rooting of cuttings. Publication of the Agricultural Research Station, Rehovot 1957 Series, no. 207– E: 93–100. [Google Scholar]Scheck H, Vasquez S, Fogle D, Gubler WD 1998. Grapegrowers report losses to black-foot and grapevine decline. California Agriculture 52: 19–23. [Crossref], [Google Scholar]Schoeneweiss DF 1981. The role of environmental stress in diseases of woody plants. Plant Disease 65: 308–314. 10.1094/PD-65-308 [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Senneset G, Forås E, KM Fremme 2007. Challenges regarding implementation of electronic chain traceability. British Food Journal 109: 805–818. 10.1108/00070700710821340 [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Sforza R, Boudon-Padieu E, Greif C 2003. New mealybug species vectoring Grapevine leafroll-associated viruses-1 and -3 (GLRaV-1 and -3). European Journal of Plant Pathology 109: 975–981. 10.1023/B:EJPP.0000003750.34458.71 [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Slippers BG, Fourie PH, Crous PW, Coutinho TA, Wingfield BD, Carnegie AJ, Wingfield MJ 2004. Speciation and distribution of Botryosphaeria spp. on native and introduced Eucalyptus trees in Australia and South Africa. Studies in Mycology 50: 343–358. [Google Scholar]Smart DR, Kocsis L, Walker MA, Stockert C 2002. Dormant buds and adventitious root formation by Vitis and other woody plants. Journal of Plant Growth Regulation 21: 296–314. 10.1007/s00344-003-0001-3 [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Smart R, Mugnai L, Lane C 2012. International viticultural consultant’s view of grapevine trunk diseases and their impact on clients. Phytopathologia Mediterranea 51: 433–434. [Google Scholar]Smart R 2013. Trunk diseases…a larger threat than phylloxera? Wine and Viticulture Journal 28: 16–18. [Google Scholar]Smith B, Wheal MS, Jones TH, Morales NB, Clingeleffer PR 2013. Heritability of adventitious rooting of grapevine dormant canes. Tree Genetics and Genomes 9: 467–474. 10.1007/s11295-012-0570-z [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Sørensen CG, Pesonen L, Bochtis DD, Vougioukas SG, Suomi P 2011. Functional requirements for a future farm management information system. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture 76: 266–276. [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Stamp J 2001. The contribution of imperfections in nursery stock to the decline of young vines in California. Phytopathologia Mediterranea 40: S369–S375. [Google Scholar]Stamp J 2010. Health status of California grapevine planting material. Wine Busines Monthly (August): 32–37. [Google Scholar]Standards Australia 2013. AS 5588–2013 grapevine propagation material. SAI Global. http://infostore.saiglobal.com/store/ (accessed 24 January 2014). [Google Scholar]Stewart-Wade SM 2011. Plant pathogens in recycled irrigation water in commercial plant nurseries and greenhouses: their detection and management. Irrigation Science 29: 267–297. 10.1007/s00271-011-0285-1 [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]This P, Lacombe T, Thomas MR 2006. Historical origins and genetic diversity of wine grape. Trends in Genetics 22: 511–519. 10.1016/j.tig.2006.07.008 [Crossref], [PubMed], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Treeby MT, Considine JA 1982. Propagation of Vitis champini planchon cv. Ramsey: relationship between carbohydrate metabolism during storage and cutting performance. American Journal of Enology and Viticulture 33: 53–56. [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Úrbez-Torres JR 2011. The status of Botryosphaeriaceae species infecting grapevines. Phytopathologia Mediterranea 50: S5–S45. [Google Scholar]Vartapetian BB, Jackson MJ 1997. Plant adaptations to anaerobic stress. Annals of Botany 79: 3–20. 10.1093/oxfordjournals.aob.a010303 [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Vartapetian BB 2006. Plant anaerobic stress as a novel trend in ecological physiology, biochemistry and molecular biology: 2. further development of the problem. Russian Journal of Plant Physiology 53: 711–738. 10.1134/S102144370606001X [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Vigues V, Yobregat O, Barthélémy B, Dias F, Coarer M, Larignon P 2009. Fungi associated with wood decay diseases: identification of the steps involving risk in French nursery. Phytopathologia Mediterranea 48: 177–178. [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Waite H 2005. Hot water treatment: cooling the confusion. The Australian and New Zealand Grapegrower and Winemaker 495: 34–36. [Google Scholar]Waite H, May P 2005. The effects of hot water treatment, hydration and order of nursery operations on cuttings of Vitis vinifera cultivars. Phytopathologia Mediterranea 44: 144–152. [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Waite H, Morton L 2007. Hot water treatment, trunk diseases and other critical factors in the production of high-quality grapevine planting material. Phytopathologia Mediterranea 46: 5–17. [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Waite H, May P, Bossinger G 2013a. Variations in phytosanitary and other management practices in Australian grapevine nurseries. Phytopathologia Mediterranea 52: 369–379. [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Waite H, Gramaje D, Whitelaw-Weckert M Torley P, Hardie WJ 2013b. Soaking grapevine cuttings in water: a potential source of cross contamination by micro-organisms. Phytopathologia Mediterranea 52: 359–368. [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Wallace J, Edwards J, Pascoe IG, May P 2004. Phaeomoniella chlamydospora inhibits callus formation by grapevine rootstock and scion cultivars. Phytopathologia Mediterranea 43: 151–152. [Google Scholar]Walter B, Martelli GP 1998. Considerations on grapevine selection and certification. Vitis 37: 87–90. [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Wample R 1993. Influence of pre- and post-treatment storage on budbreak of hot water treated cuttings of cabernet sauvignon. American Journal of Enology and Viticulture 44: 153–158. [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Wample RL 1997. Influence of pre- and post-treatment storage on rooting of hot-water-treated cuttings of Cabernet Sauvignon. American Journal of Enology and Viticulture 48: 131–136. [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Wample R, Bary A, Burr TJ 1991. Heat tolerance of dormant Vitis vinifera cittings. American Journal of Enology and Viticulture 42: 67–72. [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Warmund MR, Starbuck CJ, Lockshin L 1986. Growth, cold hardiness and carbohydrate content of Vidal blanc grapevines propagated by hardwood vs. softwood cuttings. American Journal of Enology and Viticulture 37: 215–219. [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Whitelaw-Weckert M, Rahman L, Appleby L, Hall A, Clark A C, Waite H et al. 2013. Co-infection by Botryosphaeriaceae and Ilyonectria spp. fungi during propagation causes decline of young grafted grapevines. Plant Pathology 62: 1226–1237. 10.1111/ppa.12059 [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Whiteman SA, Jaspers MV, Stewart A, Ridgway HJ 2004. Phaeomoniella chlamydospora detection in the grapevine propagation process by species-specific PCR. Phytopathologia Mediterranea 43: 156. [Google Scholar]Whiteman SA, Stewart A, Jaspers MV 2007. Infection of rootstock mother-vines by Phaeomoniella chlamydospora results in infected young grapevines. Australasian Plant Pathology 36: 198–203. [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Willock J, Deary IJ, Edwards-Jones G 1999. The role of attitudes and objectives in farmer decision making: business and environmentally-oriented behaviour in Scotland. Journal of Agricultural Economics 50: 286–303. [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Winkler AJ, Cook JA, Kliewer WM, Lider LA 1974. General viticulture, Berkeley, California, University of California Press. [Google Scholar]Woodstock LW, Taylorson RB 1981. Ethanol and acetaldehyde in imbibing soybean seeds in relation to deterioration. Plant Physiology 67: 424–428. 10.1104/pp.67.3.424 [Crossref], [PubMed], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]Zanzotto A, Autiero F, Bellotto D, Dal Cortivo G, Lucchetta G, Borgo M 2007. Occurrence of Phaeoacremonium spp. and Phaeomoniella chlamydospora in grape propagation materials and young grapevines. European Journal of Plant Pathology 119: 183–192. 10.1007/s10658-007-9160-6 [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]













Reprints and Corporate Permissions


Please note: Selecting permissions does not provide access to the full text of the article, please see our help page
How do I view content?

To request a reprint or corporate permissions for this article, please click on the relevant link below:



Order Reprints


Request Corporate Permissions


Academic Permissions


Please note: Selecting permissions does not provide access to the full text of the article, please see our help page How do I view content?


Obtain permissions instantly via Rightslink by clicking on the button below:



Request Academic Permissions


If you are unable to obtain permissions via Rightslink, please complete and submit this Permissions form. For more information, please visit our Permissions help page.






Download PDF








































More Share Options












 







Related research 

People also read lists articles that other readers of this article have read.
Recommended articles lists articles that we recommend and is powered by our AI driven recommendation engine.
Cited by lists all citing articles based on Crossref citations.Articles with the Crossref icon will open in a new tab.







People also read


Recommended articles


Cited by














































































Information for

Authors
R&D professionals
Editors
Librarians
Societies











Open access

Overview
Open journals
Open Select
Dove Medical Press
F1000Research























Opportunities

Reprints and e-prints
Advertising solutions
Accelerated publication
Corporate access solutions











Help and information

Help and contact
Newsroom
All journals
Books































Keep up to date

Register to receive personalised research and resources by email


Sign me up










Taylor and Francis Group Facebook page







Taylor and Francis Group Twitter page







Taylor and Francis Group Linkedin page








Taylor and Francis Group Youtube page







Taylor and Francis Group Weibo page




































Copyright © 2023 Informa UK Limited
Privacy policy
Cookies
Terms & conditions
Accessibility
Registered in England & Wales No. 3099067
5 Howick Place | London | SW1P 1WG























AcceptCookie Policy
We use cookies to improve your website experience. To learn about our use of cookies and how you can manage your cookie settings, please see our Cookie Policy. By closing this message, you are consenting to our use of cookies.











Your download is now in progress and you may close this window
Did you know that with a free Taylor & Francis Online account you can gain access to the following benefits?



Choose new content alerts to be informed about new research of interest to you
Easy remote access to your institution's subscriptions on any device, from any location
Save your searches and schedule alerts to send you new results
Export your search results into a .csv file to support your research



Have an account?
Login now

Don't have an account?
Register for free






Login or register to access this feature

Have an account?
Login now

Don't have an account?
Register for free


Register a free Taylor & Francis Online account today to boost your research and gain these benefits:



Choose new content alerts to be informed about new research of interest to you
Easy remote access to your institution's subscriptions on any device, from any location
Save your searches and schedule alerts to send you new results
Export your search results into a .csv file to support your research


Register
now or learn more




















