Document Name: role of Arnica LS in Eye Cream3
Document link: https://www.webmd.com/vitamins-and-supplements/arnica




Arnica in Homeopathy














































 Skip to main content  Home  Conditions  Back Conditions View All  ADD/ADHD  Allergies  Arthritis  Atrial fibrillation  Breast Cancer  Cancer  Crohn's Disease  Depression  Diabetes  DVT  Eczema  Eye Health  Heart Disease  HIV & AIDS  Lung Disease  Lupus  Mental Health  Multiple Sclerosis  Migraine  Pain Management  Psoriasis  Psoriatic Arthritis  Rheumatoid Arthritis  Sexual Conditions  Skin Problems  Sleep Disorders  Ulcerative Colitis  View All  Drugs & Supplements  Back Drugs & Supplements Drugs  Supplements  Pill Identifier  Interaction Checker  Well-Being  Back Well-Being View All  Aging Well  Baby  Birth Control  Children's Health  Diet & Weight Management  Fitness & Exercise  Food & Recipes  Healthy Beauty  Men's Health  Parenting  Pet Health  Pregnancy  Sex & Relationships  Teen Health  Women's Health  View All  Symptom Checker  Find a Doctor  More  Back More News  Blogs  Podcasts  Webinars  Newsletters  WebMD Magazine  Best Hospitals  Support Groups  Surgeries and Procedures  Orthopedics  Privacy & More  Subscribe  Log In  Search  Subscribe  Menu  Vitamins & Supplements Home  Find a Vitamin  Find by Condition  Reference  Slideshows  Quizzes  Videos  Related to Vitamins & Supplements  Drugs & Medications  Pill Identifier  My Medicine  Interaction Checker  Diet & Weight Management  Food & Recipes Vitamins and SupplementsReference Menu  Arnica  Written by R. Morgan Griffin Medically Reviewed by  Melinda  Ratini, MS, DO   on September 28, 2021  In this Article  Arnica Uses  Arnica Dose & Instructions for Use  Arnica Food Sources  Arnica Supplement Information  Arnica Warnings  Arnica is an herb that grows in Europe and the U.S. It’s often used as a skin treatment for bruises, aches, and pains.Arnica UsesEarly studies of topical homeopathic arnica gels and ointments for arthritis symptoms of the hand and knee -- like pain and swelling -- have been positive. So far, research is mixed on whether arnica skin treatments can help ease muscle pain.If eaten, the actual herb is toxic to the liver and can be fatal. However, some oral supplements contain highly diluted arnica. These are considered homeopathic treatments. These low-dose arnica tablets have been studied for muscle pain, diabetic eye damage, and swelling and pain after surgery. More research needs to be done to establish effectiveness for those problems. Because of the risks of pure arnica, the FDA classifies it as an unsafe herb. Doctors who practice complementary medicine generally advise against using arnica in any form other than in a highly diluted homeopathic form.Arnica Dose & Instructions for UseArnica is usually taken by mouth, or through ointments and fresh plant gel applied on the skin.  Homeopathic treatments are usually individualized based on the specific symptoms of the patient.For topical treatment of conditions such as osteoarthritis, it is suggested that you should use an arnica gel product and rub it into the affected joints two to three times daily for 3 weeks.Make sure you only use diluted homeopathic preparations because pure arnica can be toxic to your liver if taken internally. While there appear to be no risks to using homeopathic arnica, it is important to consult your doctor before taking it.Arnica Food SourcesThere are no natural food sources of arnica besides the plant itself. Arnica is used as a flavoring in some food products.Arnica Supplement InformationArnica can come in tablets, tinctures, ointments, gels, and mouth rinses. Like any supplement, keep arnica in a cool, dry place, away from humidity and direct sunlight.Arnica WarningsSide effects. Pure arnica herb is poisonous. Homeopathic doses are generally considered safe to use. Homeopathic arnica creams or gels can cause burning and skin irritation.Risks. Always talk to a doctor before using arnica. When swallowed, pure arnica can cause rapid heartbeat, gastrointestinal problems, kidney and liver damage, coma, and death. Don’t use arnica topically on broken or sensitive skin.Interactions. If you take any medicines regularly, discuss them with your doctor before you start using homeopathic arnica supplements. They could interact with drugs like painkillers, steroids, blood pressure drugs, blood thinners, and herbs like ginkgo biloba, garlic, and saw palmetto.Given the lack of evidence about its safety, arnica is not recommended for children and is considered unsafe for women who are pregnant or breastfeeding. Show Sources SOURCES:Longe, J. ed, The Gale Encyclopedia of Alternative Medicine, second edition, 2004.Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center web site: “About Herbs: Arnica.”Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database web site: “Arnica.”Natural Standard Patient Monograph: “Arnica.”Oberbaum, M. Cancer, Aug. 1, 2001. © 2021 WebMD, LLC. All rights reserved.  View privacy policy and trust info Top PicksToday on WebMD Vitamins Quiz  Do you know your vitamin ABCs?  11 Supplements for Menopause  Ease hot flashes and other symptoms.  Vitamin B12  Are you getting enough?  Vitamin D  Wonder pill or overkill? Recommended for You Video  Powerhouse Fruits and Veggies  Slideshow  Supplements You Shouldn't Try  Slideshow  Why You Need Vitamin E Tools & Resources How Zinc Helps: the Basics  Do You Need Vitamin K Supplements?  Is Garcinia Cambogia Safe for Weight Loss?  The Best Supplements for Healthy Digestion  How to Get the Protective Power of Vitamin K  Vitamin ABCs: What Are You Missing? Health Solutions from Our Sponsors Penis Curved When Erect?  Could I have CAD?  Treat Bent Fingers  Treat HR+, HER2- MBC  Tired of Dandruff?  Benefits of CBD  Rethink MS Treatment  AFib-Related Strokes  Risk of a Future DVT/PE  Is My Penis Normal?  Relapsing MS Options  Liver Transplants Save Lives  Finance Plastic Surgery  Bent Finger Causes  Living With Psoriasis?  Missing Teeth? More from WebMD 5 Tips to Help With Relapsing MS  How to Thrive With Narcolepsy  Relief for Blocked Hair Follicles  Psoriatic Arthritis and Your Sleep  What Psoriasis Feels Like  First Psoriatic Arthritis Flare  Talking to Your Doctor About RA  Crohn's: A 'Full-Body' Disease  Avoiding Crohn’s Flares  Health Benefits of Hemp Seed Oil  Live Better With Psoriatic Disease  Types of B-Cell Therapy for MS  5 Health Benefits of Hemp  Why Prostate Cancer Spreads  Living with Advanced Breast Cancer  Where Breast Cancer Spreads Policies Privacy Policy  Cookie Policy  Editorial Policy  Advertising Policy  Correction Policy  Terms of Use About Contact Us  About WebMD  Careers  Newsletter  Corporate  WebMD Health Services  Site Map  Accessibility Our Apps WebMD Mobile  WebMD App  Pregnancy  Baby  Allergy For Advertisers Advertise with Us  Advertising Policy  Visit WebMD on Facebook  Visit WebMD on Twitter  Visit WebMD on Pinterest  © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, an  Internet Brands  company. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.  See additional information. 







