Document Name: role of CERAPHYL 41 in Cover Cream3
Document link: https://www.truthinaging.com/ingredients/c-12-15-alkyl-lactate




C12-15 alkyl lactate
































































































 



JavaScript seems to be disabled in your browser.
                    You must have JavaScript enabled in your browser to utilize the functionality of this website.                






Free shipping on all domestic orders over $49
Truth Vitality









Sign Up






Subscribe to our mailing list
* indicates required

Email Address  *



First Name 





 

Sign Up












Login






























The honest truth about beauty & personal care products










Home


 Reviews


 Ingredients


 Community



 Get Involved Today



 Our Story











Home


 Reviews


 Ingredients


 Community



 Get Involved



 Our Story


 





Open subcategory
Close subcategory



























Home


Ingredients


C12-15 alkyl lactate

















C12-15 alkyl lactate
* A synthetic compound derived from lactic acid and C12-15 alcohols. Also known as Ceraphyl 41.


Primarily used as an emollient and solvent. Its emolliency helps give many lotions their desired creamy texture and thickness. As a moisturizer, it provides a non-oily lubrication that reduces the greasiness and tackiness of other ingredients, such as petroleum. In fact, it's often used as a substitute for mineral oil because of its excellent moisturizing capabilities.







* A synthetic compound derived from lactic acid and C12-15 alcohols. Also known as Ceraphyl 41.
 Functions:  Primarily used as an emollient and solvent. Its emolliency helps give many lotions their desired creamy texture and thickness. As a moisturizer, it provides a non-oily lubrication that reduces the greasiness and tackiness of other ingredients, such as petroleum. In fact, it's often used as a substitute for mineral oil because of its excellent moisturizing capabilities.  It's easy to emulsify, and can also be used as a thickening and lathering agent in shampoos and body washes. When used in sunscreen, it helps solubilize Benzophenone-3 and avobenzone, two frequently used chemical UV absorbers. It can be found in personal care products such as self-tanner, facial moisturizer, aftershave lotion, fragrance, acne treatment, sunscreen, bubble bath and cleanser. 


Become a member to read this article in full

Your membership includes:

Full Site-Wide Access - to all articles, reviews, features + ingredient research
Exclusive Access - spa services, treatments, life coaches + MORE
Cosmetic Concierge - personal consultations with Marta
Early Access - to new product launches
First to Know - about new ingredients + innovative products
Bonus Rewards + Gifts
Exclusive Offers + Deals
Expedited Shipping

Become a member





Become a member to Access More







Don’t Miss a Day to slay



                                    Your anti-aging regimen can't wait!
                                    Get full access to articles, and our skincare library including our ingredients database. Plus gain personal, expert skincare consultations from Marta, lots of free swag and MORE!
                                
Join and learn more about our platinum, gold, and silver memberships.
While you're deciding, enjoy a 2-week trial for subscribing to our newsletter, plus enjoy our Top 8 Anti-Aging Essentials.
Become a member











Sign up for our newsletter to
               get latest product reviews and
               Save 10%  on all orders over $50
          










Subscribe to our mailing list
* indicates required

Email Address  *



First Name 





 

Sign Up












Did you find this article useful?

yes
            -or-
            no



1
                
















Related Articles




 

Billy Jealousy knows the secre...
Posted by Copley

My boyfriend is a guy's guy, the kind wh...


Read more


 

Dr Brandt Time Arrest Cream is...
Time Arrest is the newest addition to the many skincare coll...


Read more


More Articles: 

                                    Comfort Zone Hydramemory Mask                                

 






Compare Products                    


You have no items to compare.













Truth In Aging's Five Best
The very best to choose from for your skin concerns.
Read More







Truth In Aging Videos
Helpful how-tos and reviews from Marta and friends.
Watch Now







Meet Our Contributors
The TIA community consists of our trusted reviewers.
Meet Them


 



Be Inspired
Inspiring thoughts and women who are aging gracefully.
Read More


 









Earn Rewards, get samples, Sign up and SAVE today











*Email:



Name




Sign Up







































HOME
REVIEW
INGREDIENTS
COMMUNITY
SHOP


OUR STORY
TRUTH VITALITY
CONTACT
FAQ
MEDIA




As featured in























©2020 truthinaging.com







Terms of Use


Privacy Policy


Shipping Policy


Returns policy


RSS




































   Loading...    



 

















Sign Up & Save! Take 10% off ALL your orders over $50!

















Sign Up
















