Document Name: role of Mineral Oil 80/90 in Cold Cream0
Document link: https://www.hsph.harvard.edu/nutritionsource/food-features/coconut-oil/















Coconut Oil | The Nutrition Source | Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health
























































 





























Menu
Close Menu

Skip to content



Information For:

Prospective Students
Current Students
Alumni
Faculty & Staff
Friends & Supporters
 




A to Z index
 




Search for:


 






Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health



Email
People
Departments
Calendar
Careers
my.harvard
Giving
 





About
Faculty & Research
Admissions & Aid
Academics
Executive/Continuing Ed
News
 






						The Nutrition Source					



Home > The Nutrition Source > Food Features > Coconut Oil				



The Nutrition Source
Menu





Search for:


 




Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?

Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid

Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate


Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol

Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease


Vitamins and Minerals


Healthy Drinks

Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks

Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks


Low-Calorie Sweeteners


Salt and Sodium

Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns


Carbohydrates

Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar


Sustainability

Plate and the Planet
Food Waste


Healthy Weight

Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews


Staying Active

Active Communities


Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention

Heart Disease

Prevention


Diabetes

Prevention


Cancer

Prevention


Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity


Recipes

Home Cooking
Food Service Resources


Food Features
Additional Resources
About
FAQ
Contact
 






Coconut Oil

 

In recent years, the popularity of coconut and particularly coconut oil has soared because of touted health benefits. Fueling the coconut oil trend, celebrity endorsements have claimed the ingredient to help blast away belly fat, curb appetite, strengthen the immune system, prevent heart disease, and stave off dementia and Alzheimer’s disease. A survey found that 72% of Americans rated coconut oil as “healthy,” though only 37% of nutrition experts agreed. [1] Coconut oil is popular in several trending diets including ketogenic and Paleo diets.
As consumer demand for plant-based foods increases, coconut oil has become a popular fat choice for its rich flavor with a mild coconut aroma.
Source Of
Coconut oil is 100% fat, 80-90% of which is saturated fat. This gives it a firm texture at cold or room temperatures. Fat is made up of smaller molecules called fatty acids, and there are several types of saturated fatty acids in coconut oil. The predominant type is lauric acid (47%), with myristic and palmitic acids present in smaller amounts, which have been shown in research to raise harmful LDL levels. Also present in trace amounts are monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats.
Coconut oil contains no cholesterol, no fiber, and only traces of vitamins, minerals, and plant sterols. Plant sterols have a chemical structure that mimics blood cholesterol, and may help to block the absorption of cholesterol in the body. However, the amount found in a few tablespoons of coconut oil is too small to produce a beneficial effect.
Coconut Oil and Health 

Many of the health claims for coconut oil refer to research that used a special formulation of coconut oil made of 100% medium-chain triglycerides (MCTs), not the commercial coconut oil most available on supermarket shelves. MCTs have a shorter chemical structure than other fats, and so are quickly absorbed and used by the body. After digestion, MCTs travel to the liver where they are immediately used for energy. The theory is that this quickly absorbed form promotes satiety and prevents fat storage. Coconut oil contains mostly lauric acid, which is not an MCT. Lauric acid is absorbed more slowly and metabolized like other long-chain fatty acids. So the health benefits reported from a specially constructed MCT coconut oil that contains medium-chain triglycerides other than lauric acid cannot be applied directly to commercial coconut oils. [2]
Although epidemiological studies find that groups of people who include coconut as part of their native diets (e.g., India, Philippines, Polynesia) have low rates of cardiovascular disease, it is important to note that many other characteristics, dietary and other, could be explanatory. Also, the type of coconut they eat is different than what is used in a typical Western diet. These groups do not eat processed coconut oil, but the whole coconut as coconut meat or pressed coconut cream, along with an indigenous diet of foods rich in fiber and low in processed and sugary foods. [2]
A literature review on the use of coconut products (oil, milk, flesh, or cream) included 21 observational and clinical studies. [2]

The epidemiological studies observed people from Samoa, the Philippines, New Zealand, and New Guinea consuming whole coconut as part of their traditional diets. Overall their diets were similar: coconut flesh and milk, fresh fruit, vegetables, and fish. Studies found that those who ate higher amounts of coconut oil had increased beneficial HDL cholesterol levels but also increased total cholesterol and triglycerides.
Eight small short-term clinical trials lasting from 5-8 weeks with a range of 9-83 participants were examined with an intervention of a coconut oil diet. When compared with a butter or unsaturated fat (olive or safflower oil) diet, coconut oil raised total cholesterol, HDL, and harmful LDL levels more than unsaturated oils, but not more than butter. Coconut oil was also found to raise total and LDL cholesterol to a greater or similar degree as other saturated fats like beef fat and palm oil.
The authors concluded that because of coconut oil’s effects on raising blood cholesterol including harmful LDL and in some cases triglycerides, and because its cholesterol-raising effects were comparable to other saturated fats, the oil should not be viewed as a heart-healthy food and should be limited in the diet.


In a meta-analysis of 16 clinical trials, coconut oil was found to increase both LDL and HDL cholesterol levels in participants, compared with nontropical vegetable oils (e.g., sunflower, canola, olive). [3] Coconut oil increased total cholesterol by about 15 points, LDL by 10 points, and HDL by 4 points. Coconut oil also increased these values when compared with another tropical oil, palm oil: total cholesterol increased by about 25 points, LDL by 20 points, and HDL by 3 points. The analysis did not find that coconut oil versus other vegetable oils had any significant effect on body weight, waist circumference, or body fat percentage.
The American Heart Association (AHA) issued a scientific advisory statement in 2017 to replace saturated fats (including coconut and other tropical oils) with unsaturated fats. Based on a review of seven controlled trials, coconut oil was found to raise harmful LDL cholesterol levels. The AHA advised against the use of coconut oil, and suggested limiting all saturated fat. For those at risk for or who have heart disease, they advise no more than 6% of total calories from saturated fat, or about 13 grams based on a 2000-calorie diet. One tablespoon of coconut oil comes close to that limit at about 12 grams of saturated fat. [4]
Coconut oil contains as many calories and total fat as other fat sources, about 120 calories and 14 grams of fat per tablespoon. Coconut oil has a unique flavor and is best used in small amounts as a periodic alternative to other oils in baking and cooking, in context of a healthy eating pattern.

Purchase and Storage
Coconut oil is made by pressing fresh coconut meat or dried coconut meat called copra. Virgin coconut oil uses fresh meat, while refined coconut oil typically uses copra. Unlike olive oil, the terms “virgin” and “extra virgin” are not regulated with coconut oil. There is no difference in products labeled with these terms.

Virgin or Extra Virgin (interchangeable terms): If using a “dry” method, the fresh coconut meat of mature coconuts is dried quickly with a small amount of heat, and then pressed with a machine to remove the oil. If using a “wet” method, a machine presses fresh coconut meat to yield milk and oil. The milk is separated from the oil by fermentation, enzymes, or centrifuge machines. The resulting oil has a smoke point of about 350 degrees Fahrenheit (F), which can be used for quick sautéing or baking but is not appropriate for very high heat such as deep-frying. You may also see the following terms on labels of coconut oil:

Expeller-pressed—A machine presses the oil from coconut flesh, often with the use of steam or heat.
Cold-pressed—The oil is pressed without use of heat. The temperature remains below 120 degrees F; this is believed to help retain more nutrients.


Refined: The copra is machine-pressed to release the oil. The oil is then steamed or heated to deodorize the oil and “bleached” by filtering through clays to remove impurities and any remaining bacteria. Sometimes chemical solvents such as hexane may be used to extract oil from the copra. The resulting oil has a higher smoke point at about 400-450 degrees F, and is flavorless and odorless.
Partially Hydrogenated: The small amount of unsaturated fats in coconut oil is hydrogenated or partially hydrogenated to extend shelf life and help maintain its solid texture in warm temperatures. This process creates trans fats, which should be avoided.

Store coconut oil in a cool dark location in a sealed container or in the refrigerator. The shelf life will vary, depending on the type of processing and how it is stored. Refined coconut oil generally lasts for a few months, whereas virgin coconut oil may last for 2-3 years if stored properly away from heat and light. Signs of spoilage include mold, a yellow tint, or “off” odors or flavors.
Make 
Coconut oil has a melting point of 78 degrees F. If the oil liquefies on a very warm day, stir well before using.

When substituting coconut oil for butter or vegetable shortening, use 25% less coconut oil than the amount of butter listed in the recipe due to its higher percentage of fat solids. Use refined coconut oil if you do not want a coconut flavor.
Sauté vegetables in one tablespoon of virgin coconut oil to vary the flavor.
Add a tablespoon of virgin coconut oil to sauces and curries to enhance flavor.

Did You Know?

The Philippines is the greatest worldwide producer of coconut oil. Indonesia and India are the next largest producers. The Philippines, European Union, United States, and India are the greatest consumers of coconut oil.
Coconut oil is an effective moisturizer for skin and hair. Using a small amount, gently massage directly into skin. For dry or frizzy hair, apply a small amount to the hair shaft and leave in for desired time (a few minutes to overnight), and then wash out. 

Related

Saturated fat, regardless of type, linked with increased heart disease risk
Setting the record straight: It’s best to swap out saturated fats for healthier fats
Ask the Expert: Healthy Fats



References

Quealy, K. and Sanger-Katz, M. Is Sushi ‘Healthy’? What About Granola? Where Americans and Nutritionists Disagree. New York Times. July 5, 2016.
Eyres L, Eyres MF, Chisholm A, Brown RC. Coconut oil consumption and cardiovascular risk factors in humans. Nutrition reviews. 2016 Apr 1;74(4):267-80.
Neelakantan N, Seah JY, van Dam RM. The Effect of Coconut Oil Consumption on Cardiovascular Risk Factors: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Clinical Trials. Circulation. 2020 Mar 10;141(10):803-14.
Sacks FM, Lichtenstein AH, Wu JH, Appel LJ, Creager MA, Kris-Etherton PM, Miller M, Rimm EB, Rudel LL, Robinson JG, Stone NJ. Dietary fats and cardiovascular disease: a presidential advisory from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2017 Jan 1:CIR-0000000000000510.



Terms of UseThe contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products. 





Explore Other Food Features:Almonds
Apples
Aquatic Foods
Avocados
Bananas
Brussels Sprouts
Chia Seeds
Coconut Oil
Coffee
Dairy

Milk
Cheese
Yogurt


Dark Chocolate
Eggs
Kale
Legumes and Pulses

Chickpeas (Garbanzo Beans)
Lentils


Mushrooms
Oats
Quinoa
Rice
Sweet Potatoes
Tea
Vinegar
Water
Winter Squash
Explore:



Healthy Oils


Use healthy oils (like olive and canola oil) for cooking, on salad, and at the table. Limit butter. Avoid trans fat.















HEALTHY
OILS





Water


Drink water, tea, or coffee (with little or no sugar). Limit milk/dairy (1-2 servings/day) and juice (1 small glass/day). Avoid sugary drinks.








WATER









Vegetables


The more veggies — and the greater the variety — the better. Potatoes and French fries don’t count.



VEGETABLES





Fruits


Eat plenty of fruits of all colors



FRUITS





Healthy Protein


Choose fish, poultry, beans, and nuts; limit red meat and cheese; avoid bacon, cold cuts, and other processed meats.



HEALTHY
PROTEIN





Whole Grains


Eat a variety of whole grains (like whole-wheat bread, whole-grain pasta, and brown rice). Limit refined grains (like white rice and white bread).



WHOLE
GRAINS





Stay Active


Incorporate physical activity into your daily routine.













 Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

 


Support The Nutrition Source
Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
Make a gift




 
A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier. Sign up here.

 Explore the downloadable guide with tips and strategies for healthy eating and healthy living.

 




Information For:

Prospective Students
Current Students
Alumni
Faculty & Staff
Friends & Supporters
 



About

Key Facts
Renaming the School
Office of the Dean
Location and Facilities
Administrative Offices
Contact Us


Faculty and Research

Faculty and Researcher Directory
Academic Departments, Divisions and Centers
International Research
Postdoctoral Research Fellows
Office of Faculty Affairs
Faculty Searches
Office of Diversity and Inclusion


Admissions & Aid

Why Harvard Chan
Degree Programs
Non-Degree Programs
Financial Aid
Student Experience
Career Advancement
Apply


Academics

Academic Departments
Divisions
Research Centers
Flagship Initiatives
International Research
Research Administration and Support
Degree Programs
Fellowships and Residencies
Summer Programs
Continuing Professional Education
Interdisciplinary Concentrations
Academic Calendar
Harvard Chan Viewbook


Executive/Continuing Ed

Program Offerings
Custom Programs
Request Information
News and Resources
About ECPE
Contact


News

Featured News
Press Releases
Student Stories
In the News
Newsletters
HPH Magazine
Why Public Health?


 


Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health


677 Huntington Avenue,
						Boston,
						MA
02115





Twitter
Facebook
YouTube
LinkedIn
Instagram
iTunes
 



Harvard Chan Home
Contact Us
Harvard University Home
Make a Gift
Privacy Policy
Report Copyright Violation
Accessibility
 


					Copyright © 2023 The President and Fellows of Harvard College				





 
















